Title: SAGA: Scene-Aware, Goal-Evolving Agents for Long-Horizon CivRealm Strategy Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29932v2

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:58:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# SAGA: Scene-Aware, Goal-Evolving Agents for Long-Horizon CivRealm Strategy Planning 

# Tianyu Jin 1, Shuo Chen 2,* , Yida Wang 1, Liuyu Xiang 1, Yingzhuo Liu 1, Zhiyao Jiang 1, Yexin Li 2,Zhaofeng He 1

> 1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI) 

> *

Corresponding author. chenshuo@bigai.ai 

Abstract 

Long-horizon strategic planning in complex strategy games demands concurrent reasoning across multiple decision do-mains under imperfect information and sparse reward. Exist-ing LLM-based agents suffer from three systematic failures: scene blindness from raw tile coordinates, context overflow and domain coupling from monolithic state dumps, and shal-low cross-game learning that treats each episode in isolation. We present SAGA, an LLM multi-agent framework with three mechanisms each directly targeting one class of failure: (i) a 

Map-Semantic Scene Graph that encodes typed spatial re-lations among game entities into per-unit natural-language context, resolving spatial blindness without global token infla-tion; (ii) a Tool-Augmented Planner that pulls fine-grained domain state on demand and dispatches per-domain direc-tives to dedicated specialist controllers, eliminating context overflow, domain coupling, and mechanical constraint viola-tions; and (iii) a Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop that com-bines periodic within-game goal generation with structured cross-game causal post-mortem, enabling principled strategic evolution without manual reward engineering. Evaluated on FreeCiv, SAGA attains the highest mean civilization score— the environment’s sole sparse objective reward—with lower variance than the two strongest baselines, and is the only method that significantly surpasses every baseline on infras-tructure construction, the resource axis most readily sacrificed under multi-objective conflict. It outscores the two strongest baselines in most head-to-head games while cutting output tokens—the dominant decoding cost—by 27%. Equipped with the cross-game evolution module, SAGA reaches the high-est end-of-chain score across five successive episodes. Abla-tion studies confirm that each architectural component con-tributes independently to this advantage. Our code is available at https://github.com/KazeCloud/SAGA-Civrealm. 

# 1 Introduction 

Long-horizon planning in multi-domain environments— where an agent must concurrently manage technology, gov-ernment/economic policy, diplomacy, city production, civil-ian expansion, and military operations across hundreds of turns under imperfect information—represents a fundamental frontier for LLM-based planning research. Complex strategy games such as FreeCiv [ 1] instantiate this challenge in its most demanding form: six tightly coupled controller domains (technology, government, diplomacy, city management, civil-ian units, and military units), sparse outcome feedback over hundred-turn games, hard irreversible mechanical constraints, and an ever-expanding state space (Figure 1). Deploying LLM agents in such settings exposes five con-crete failure modes that group into the three classes our mechanisms address. (i) Raw spatial observations carry no relational semantics; (ii) monolithic state dumps grow un-boundedly with empire size—exceeding 15k tokens per step— and bury decision-relevant signal in undifferentiated boiler-plate [ 2, 3]; and (iii) monolithic outputs conflate all decision domains, causing high-priority threats to crowd out critical infrastructure investments [ 4, 5 ]. (iv) High-level planning abstractions operate above the granularity of irreversible me-chanical rules; constraint violations produce silent failures— rejected by the environment without error signals—rendering them invisible and causally unattributable to the planner. 

(v) While cross-game experience accumulation has been ex-plored [ 3, 6], prior methods retrieve and replay what hap-pened without structured causal attribution, offering heuristic replay rather than principled strategic evolution. We introduce SAGA , which resolves all five failure modes through three mechanisms, instantiated and validated here on CivRealm. The Map-Semantic Scene Graph offers a princi-pled alternative to coordinate injection for language-model spatial grounding: it constructs typed relational edges among game entities each turn and renders each entity’s local neigh-bourhood as natural language delivered exclusively to its own controller, achieving scene awareness without global token inflation. The Tool-Augmented Strategic Pipeline demon-strates scalable multi-domain planning via a pull-based infor-mation model (on-demand tool calls retrieve only the domain state needed before each decision) and a structured output schema that partitions each plan into non-overlapping per-domain fields, each routed to a dedicated specialist controller, preventing cross-domain interference by construction at the dispatch layer. The Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop addresses sparse reward at two timescales: within each episode , periodic goal generation synthesizes dense progress signals; across episodes , structured causal post-mortem maintains an evolv-ing strategic prior that reinforces effective strategies without manual reward engineering. 

Contributions. (C1) We propose SAGA, a three-mechanism 

> arXiv:2606.29932v2 [cs.AI] 2 Jul 2026 (a) Measurable decision-complexity landscape. The horizon-tal axis measures the outcome-feedback horizon on a log-scale over low-level decisions, while the vertical axis counts active coupled domains/controllers. CivRealm combines a 100+ turn outcome horizon with six coupled controller do-mains.
> (b) Domain-level comparison across StarCraft II, CivRealm, and Minecraft. CivRealm is shown with six fully coupled domains: technology, government, diplomacy, civilian, mili-tary, and city management.

Figure 1: FreeCiv as a complex multi-domain strategy benchmark. (a) CivRealm lies in the high-complexity regime when environments are compared by outcome-feedback horizon and the number of active coupled domains/controllers. (b) A domain-level comparison shows CivRealm’s six-domain grand-strategy coupling against StarCraft II’s micro/macro production loop and Minecraft’s local task-chain dependencies. LLM multi-agent framework—comprising a Map-Semantic Scene Graph, a Tool-Augmented Strategic Pipeline, and a Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop—that addresses five funda-mental failure modes in long-horizon multi-domain plan-ning: scene grounding, context scalability, domain decou-pling, constraint awareness, and principled cross-episode strategic evolution. (C2) Comprehensive evaluation against five competitive LLM baselines on FreeCiv demonstrates state-of-the-art performance across three complementary ex-periments: (i) SAGA attains the highest mean on five of the six development metrics; its advantage is statistically strongest on infrastructure (Buildings), the only metric on which it significantly surpasses all five baselines (Mann– Whitney p < 0.05 , Holm-corrected within the per-metric family), while its Score lead is significant over three of five baselines and—owing to CivRealm’s heavy-tailed score distribution—within noise against the two strongest (CoS, HIMA), over which it nonetheless prevails in ≥72% of head-to-head games; it further cuts output tokens, the dominant de-coding cost, by 27% relative to the strongest baseline (Table 2; full tests in Appendix D); (ii) when all methods are equipped with the cross-game evolution module, SAGA achieves the highest final score across five successive episodes (Figure 3); and (iii) ablation studies confirm that the SceneGraph and inner-loop feedback each contribute independently (removing either reduces score by ∼25%), while removing on-demand tools critically impairs survival, reducing score by 49% (Ta-ble 4). 

# 2 Related Work 

Complex Interactive Environments. Decision-making benchmarks span cooperative [ 9, 10 ], competitive [ 11 , 12 ], partially observable [ 13 , 14 ], and task-oriented [ 15 , 16 , 17 ,18 ] settings. None simultaneously satisfies all ten criteria that complex strategy demands (Appendix A), motivating CivRealm [1] as a uniquely comprehensive benchmark. 

Large-Language-Model-based Agents for Decision Mak-ing. ReAct [ 19 ] established the foundational paradigm of interleaving chain-of-thought reasoning with tool calls. Sub-sequent work extended this to open-world curricula [ 20 ], multi-agent software pipelines [ 21 ], distributed coordina-tion [ 22 ], and embodied perception bottlenecks [ 23 ]. Plan-ning architectures for long-horizon strategy games include CoS [ 2], Optimus-2 [ 5], and HIMA [ 4]; Section 5 describes each baseline in detail. 

LLM Agents with Reflection and Self-Evolution Capabili-ties. Reflexion [ 24 ] and Self-Refine [ 25 ] introduced verbal self-criticism for iterative output refinement. EvolveR [ 6 ] dis-tills interaction trajectories into reusable strategic principles across task instances—the spirit closest to our cross-game outer loop. EpicStar [ 3 ] applies episodic memory via cross-game recall but its authors intentionally disable strategic in-heritance in the baseline to isolate episodic-memory effects, a limitation our dual-horizon loop explicitly overcomes [7, 8]. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

Partially Observable Markov Decision Process. We model the FreeCiv strategy game as a discrete-time Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), defined by the tuple M = ⟨S , O, A, T, R, γ ⟩. S denotes the global game state encoding all map tiles, unit positions, city configu-rations, technology trees, government forms, and diplomatic relations. O is the agent-accessible observation space, a strict subset of S due to persistent fog-of-war. The joint action space decomposes over six controller-aligned strategic do-mains: 

A = Atech × A gov × A dipl × A city × A civilian × A military .

(1) 

T : S × A → ∆( S) is the stochastic transition kernel; 

R : S × A → R is the lagged aggregate reward (the in-game civilization score); and γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor. The agent policy π : O∗ → A targets high cumulative reward 

EP Tt=0 γtR(st, a t). We adopt this POMDP purely as a 

problem formulation that motivates SAGA’s architecture; we do not learn or optimize π by reinforcement learning and make no optimality claim. 

FreeCiv as a POMDP Instance. FreeCiv [ 1 ] instantiates 

M at large combinatorial scale: the action space spans 87 technology types, 68 building types, 52 unit types, 6 govern-ment forms, and 5 diplomatic states. Civilizations progress through eight technological ages; the joint state space grows from roughly 10 15 configurations in the early game to 10 650 

in advanced stages, while the action space grows correspond-ingly from 10 4 to 10 166 [ 1]. Observations ot ∈ O are de-livered by the CivRealm gym [ 1] across six modalities— 

tile (an M ×N terrain grid), unit , city , tech , gov ,and dipl —and translated into structured natural language for LLM consumption by the FullLLMObsWrapper . This combinatorial scale, combined with the strict information asymmetry between S and Ot across hundreds of turns on stochastically generated maps, motivates the architectural choices described in Section 4. 

# 4 The SAGA Framework 

4.1 System Overview 

Addressing the five failure modes from §1—spatial blind-ness (i), context overflow (ii), domain coupling (iii), con-straint violations (iv), and shallow cross-game learning (v)— SAGA employs three tightly integrated mechanisms (Fig-ure 2): the Map-Semantic Scene Graph (§4.2) resolves (i); the Tool-Augmented Planner (§4.3) resolves (ii, iii, iv); and the Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop (§4.4) resolves (v). For formal pseudocode, see Appendix E. 

4.2 Map-Semantic Scene Graph 

The SceneGraph G = ( V, E) is constructed fresh each turn. Nodes V are friendly entities (own cities and units) and enemy entities (opponent cities and units). Table 1: On-demand tools available to the SAGA Planner. Tool calls replace pre-injected state dumps, reducing input tokens while improving decision accuracy.        

> Tool Returns & Usage
> query_city_metrics Per-city production, food, gold, science, happiness, unit burden, and recent production history (items built over the past turns).
> Used before: City plan
> query_army_roster Full unit table (type, pos, HP, MP, veteran, fortified) + city garrison.
> Used before: Military plan
> query_tech_status Researched count, current research, next 3 available techs.
> Used before: Tech plan

The graph encodes two functionally distinct classes of edges: friendly-to-friendly edges for intra-team coordina-tion and navigation, and friendly-to-enemy edges for of-fensive targeting and defensive threat signaling. Friendly-to-friendly edges keep the own-team subgraph connected: every own unit keeps a distance-unbounded global anchor to its nearest friendly city, and own cities and units are linked within proximity radius. Friendly-to-enemy edges cover both offense and defense: each military unit receives directed 

attack-compass edges to all visible enemy cities as long-range offensive beacons, while threat edges fire whenever an enemy unit strays beyond its nearest city’s influence radius, routing the alert to the closest allied entity and surfacing the approaching threat directly in its prompt. Each edge is annotated with Manhattan distance dis-cretized into three levels ( close <3, medium <10, far ≥10) and eight-way cardinal direction from coordinate deltas. 

SceneGraph.invoke(entity_id) renders this into concise natural language exclusively for the corresponding controller, converting implicit grid coordinates into explicit relational context without global token inflation. A representa-tive output reads: “Enemy Warriors (ID:52) medium (5 tiles) to the NorthEast. Empire Stronghold: nearest friendly city Seoul (ID:116) far (12 tiles) South. ■ ATTACK TARGET: enemy city Kyoto (ID:88) far (18 tiles) East.” 

4.3 Tool-Augmented Planning and Decoupled Execution 

The central Planner is a ReActAgent with access to three on-demand tools (Table 1). Rather than receiving a mono-lithic state dump of the raw game state—which grows un-boundedly as the empire expands and drives context-window failures in all baseline architectures—the Planner begins each turn with a lean strategic digest : aggregated empire metrics, recent short-term goal progress, directional expan-sion analysis from the SceneGraph, and alert summaries. Fine-grained domain information is fetched only on demand through tool calls before the Planner commits to any deci-sion in that domain. This pull-based information architecture naturally scales with the empire size without risking context-Figure 2: SAGA System Architecture. Left : FreeCiv game state at turn t with three decision points: A⃝ FullLLMObsWrapper 

converts raw game state into structured natural language; B⃝ Map-Semantic SceneGraph G=( V, E) encodes friend-ly/enemy spatial relations (distance, direction, threat edges) as concise relational context for the planner (§4.2); C⃝ the 

ReActAgent Planner calls on-demand tools and dispatches a structured plan to six Specialist Controllers (§4.3). Right :Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop—SQLite logs feed GameAnalyst post-mortem; PreGameStrategist distills findings into 

strategic_evolution_chain.md injected at each new game start (§4.4). window collapse, while ensuring that each domain decision is grounded in precise, up-to-date state information rather than a stale pre-injected summary. The Planner’s structured output ( PlannerResponse )follows the six domains of Eq. 1 through controller-aligned directive streams, with heterogeneous units handled by sepa-rate civilian and military controllers and diplomacy routed through a serialized controller: city (production queue per city ID, constrained to Acity (τt) to prevent hallucinated in-valid orders), civilian (per-unit strategic directions for civil-ian units), military (per-unit tactical assignments for combat units), tech (technology research selection), gov (govern-ment type and tax-rate adjustments), and diplomacy (nego-tiation stance and treaty handling). Diplomatic guidance is forwarded to the Diplomacy controller, which is executed sep-arately at the start of the following turn rather than through the concurrent pool. This explicit domain partitioning pre-vents cross-domain contamination—a failure mode observed in all baselines where city production directives are overrid-den by military allocation reasoning within a unified output, causing persistent over-militarization at the expense of eco-nomic development. Upon receiving the plan, a ThreadPoolExecutor (up to 20 workers) dispatches concurrently to six specialized 

ReActAgent controllers: City selects immediate produc-tion actions for each city, constrained by technology-locked available actions to prevent hallucination; Civilian receives SceneGraph context plus directives to autonomously choose precise tile actions (e.g., found city, irrigate); Military uses SceneGraph threat edges and an attack compass to execute unit-level tactical moves; Tech selects research paths while avoiding costly mid-research switches; Gov adjusts govern-ment types and tax rates based on economic directives; and 

Diplomacy executes the preceding turn’s directive (determin-ing stances like Peace or Alliance) prior to parallel dispatch, serialized under a mutex lock to prevent concurrent state conflicts. 

4.4 Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop 

Short-term inner loop (within a game). In the absence of dense per-turn reward signals, SAGA constructs a syn-thetic progress signal through periodic strategic compres-sion and goal generation. Every K=6 turns—a cadence bal-ancing planning overhead against tactical responsiveness— 

AbstractAgent compresses the preceding K turns of SQLite action logs into a structured semantic summary that both affirms effective strategic directions (e.g., con-firming that early Settler production is on track) and 

flags missteps requiring correction (e.g., identifying ex-cessive military spending at the expense of infrastruc-ture). SetGoalAgent then receives this summary to-gether with the current game state and—when available— the cross-game strategic_evolution_chain.md 

and game_analysis_report.json , grounding near-horizon goals in both within-game progress and accumulated cross-game knowledge. Its output takes the form of time-bounded, domain-specific directives (e.g., “Produce 3 Set-tlers and 2 Granaries; fortify border cities with walls and gar-rison units (10 turns); research Alphabet (7 turns)” ), which serve as measurable credit-assignment proxies for the Plan-ner’s next cycle and compensate for the long sparse-reward horizon. 

Emergency replanning. Outside the periodic schedule, SAGA monitors every turn for two critical events: new hos-tile units appearing near friendly cities, or a controlled city falling to opponents. Either event immediately triggers full re-invocation of the goal-evaluation and planning phases (§4.4, §4.3), overriding the current cycle boundary. This interrupt prevents a failure pattern that arises when strategic replanning is bound to periodic intervals: the Planner continues issuing expansion directives even while the empire is under active military threat. 

Long-term outer loop (across games). At game end, 

GameAnalyst performs a structured post-mortem that examines both successful and failed episodes in depth— analyzing diplomatic event traces, city production histories, and score trajectories—to identify root causes of decisive out-comes (e.g., “Early government transition enabled sustained economic dominance” or “Technology disadvantage led to military collapse at turn 107” ). The analysis is encoded into a JSON report stored in the knowledge layer. At the start of the next game, PreGameStrategist reads this report along-side the strategic_evolution_chain.md , which continuously reinforces strategies that have proved effective across episodes and iterates those that have not—replacing or refining failed approaches rather than discarding all prior knowledge. The top-ranked principles are injected directly into the Planner’s system prompt, converting per-game anal-yses into a transferable strategic prior that grows richer with each successive episode, realizing systematic cross-game improvement without any manual reward engineering. 

# 5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

Environment & Implementation. All experiments use the CivRealm gym environment [ 1] with FreeCiv 2.6 as the backend. Each episode runs for a maximum of 150 turns on a 23 ×23 Classical map against 2 built-in AI opponents, plus active barbarians and pirates. A fixed global map seed (GLOBAL_SEED=2025 ) ensures map reproducibility. To en-sure a strictly fair comparison, all baselines and our method are powered by the official Doubao-Seed-1.8 large language model via the same API endpoint. Each method is evaluated over 10 independent runs, and we report the mean and stan-dard deviation. A detailed justification of the hyperparameters is provided in Appendix B. 

Baselines. We compare against five LLM-based planning baselines: CoS [ 2] (compresses turn history into rolling sum-maries for context management), EpicStar [ 3] (retrieves simi-lar past episodes as cross-game strategic memory), Optimus-2 [ 5] (conditions action selection on expand/consolidate phase milestones), HIMA [ 4 ] (aggregates multi-advisor strategic council into a unified plan), and Mastaba [ 1 ] (con-denses the map into a compact rule-based state sketch). All baselines share the same FullLLMObsWrapper ,

ReActAgent controller infrastructure, and LLM backbone; only the planner architecture and strategy module differ. A qualitative paradigm comparison across five design dimen-sions is provided in Table 9 (Appendix F). 

Baseline Adaptation Protocol. Most baselines were orig-inally designed for other environments (StarCraft for CoS, Minecraft for Optimus-2, episodic-memory tasks for EpicStar) and do not run natively on CivRealm. To isolate each method’s planner-level mechanism, we re-implement every baseline—including Mastaba, the native CivRealm agent—on a shared infrastructure layer: the same 

FullLLMObsWrapper observation adapter, the same on-demand tool suite, the same six specialist controllers with action-mask validation, the same SQLite logging substrate, and the same cross-game evolution chain when enabled. Only the central Planner differs across methods. This protocol de-liberately hands every infrastructure innovation to the base-lines, so any performance gap is attributable to the planner architecture alone—and constitutes, to our knowledge, the first apples-to-apples planner-level comparison on CivRealm. 

Evaluation Metrics. We assess civilization development across seven dimensions: Score (composite in-game status at turn 150), Technology (distinct technologies researched), 

Military Power (aggregate unit scores), Cities (maximum owned cities), Buildings (constructed infrastructure), Diplo-macy (cumulative milestone score: Ceasefire +5, Armistice +10, Peace +15, Alliance +20, up to 50 pts per opponent), and 

Token Consumption (normalized Input and Output token usage over 150 turns). Together these metrics provide a holis-tic profile of civilizational development and computational cost. Detailed definitions and calculation methods for each metric are provided in Appendix C. 

5.2 Main Results 

Overall performance. Table 2 reports all six methods on Map Seed 2025 (base planner only, no cross-game evolution module; n=10 per method). SAGA attains the highest mean on five of the six metrics, but with sharply different statistical strength, which we report honestly (full tests in Appendix D). The decisive result is infrastructure : SAGA builds far more than any competitor (Buildings 16 .3 vs. ≤ 7.5 for every base-line), and this is the only metric on which it significantly beats all five baselines (two-sided Mann–Whitney p < 0.05 ,Holm-corrected; head-to-head win-rate 78 –98% ). On Score ,SAGA posts the highest mean ( 60 .7 ± 14 .0) and the low-est variance among the capable methods (std 14 .0 vs. CoS 

20 .3, HIMA 22 .3); the lead is significant over the weaker three baselines but, given CivRealm’s heavy-tailed scores, within noise against the two strongest—CoS ( 47 .8, p=0 .06 )and HIMA ( 43 .7, p=0 .10 )—over which SAGA nonetheless wins ≥ 72% of head-to-head games. Cities and Military lead in the mean but reach significance against only a subset of baselines, so we do not rest our claims on them. Technology is a statistical tie ( 13 .4 vs. CoS 13 .3): SAGA matches the field’s tech breadth while selecting high-value prerequisites on demand rather than accumulating numerous inexpensive early-tier technologies as CoS does—which is why an equal technology count converts into markedly more Buildings and a higher overall Score. On token cost (Table 3; methodology in Appendix G), SAGA trades higher Input ( 258 k±54 k, as the SetGoalAgent and AbstractAgent feed the Plan-ner rich context each turn) for far lower Output ( 109 k±14 k)than the two strongest baselines, CoS ( ∼149k) and HIMA (∼219k); the three baselines with smaller Output (EpicStar, Optimus-2, Mastaba) score 32–42% below SAGA. Output tokens are the dominant cost—pricier per token and the se-quential bottleneck for latency—so this reduction reflects more precise decisions: given clear hierarchical directives, the Planner emits compact, well-formed action sequences in-stead of verbose hedged plans, which also curbs hallucinated illegal actions. 

Architecture-agnostic scalability of the cross-game evo-lution module. Figure 3a reveals a key finding: when the dual-horizon outer loop ( GameAnalyst + Strategic Evolution Chain ) is plugged into the baseline meth-ods under identical conditions, nearly all baselines demon-strate a substantial absolute score increase from Game 1 to Game 5 (HIMA: 31 → 81 ; CoS: 35 → 80 ; Mastaba: 

56 → 74 ; Optimus-2: 34 → 59 ; SAGA: 57 → 90 ). This broad uplift demonstrates that the evolution module serves as an architecture-agnostic, plug-and-play enhancement that successfully distills valuable strategic knowledge regardless of the underlying decision backbone. The exception is Epic-Star ( 23 → 17 ): as the weakest base method (Table 2), its TF-IDF episodic retrieval fails to surface relevant memories in FreeCiv’s high-dimensional state space, leaving the in-jected priors largely unexploited. Cross-game evolution thus amplifies a capable backbone but cannot compensate for poor retrieval precision. 

Stable knowledge exploitation requires a capable execu-tion backbone. Despite the general terminal improvement, the per-episode trajectories of all baselines in Figure 3(a) os-cillate sharply from one game to the next; SAGA is subject to the same environmental stochasticity, yet it leads at the start and reaches the highest score by Game 5. We attribute this to a knowledge-utilization bottleneck : injected priors help only if the decision layer can act on them—scene-grounding ab-stract directives, acquiring precise state via on-demand tools, and translating long-horizon goals into verifiable sub-goals. Baselines lacking these capabilities oscillate or collapse un-der stochasticity, whereas SAGA’s leading position confirms that scene-aware, tool-augmented, goal-driven planning is the reliable execution substrate. 

Cross-seed generalization. Figures 3(b)–(e) extend the analysis across four statistically independent map seeds (2025–2028). In every seed, the radar polygon for SAGA’s Game 5 run is substantially larger than its Game 1 counterpart, driven by gains on Score, Military, Cities, and Buildings— indicating that the strategic principles accumulated dur-ing play transfer to structurally different maps. Given this multi-seed, multi-axis empirical evidence, the cross-game modules ( GameAnalyst and Strategic Evolution Chain ) are considered validated at the system level; they are therefore not separately ablated in Table 4, which focuses exclusively on intra-game architectural components. 

5.3 Ablation Studies 

To isolate SAGA’s architectural contributions, we ablate its intra-game framework. Because the components are tightly coupled, we group the ablations into three innovations: (1) the Map-Semantic SceneGraph, (2) the On-demand Tools, and (3) the Inner-Loop cycle (Table 4). 

Impact of disabling SceneGraph. The first ablation ( w/o SceneGraph ) removes the dynamic Map-Semantic Scene-Graph, forcing the agent to rely on a raw global observation Table 2: Main quantitative results on Map Seed 2025, base planner only (excluding any post-game analysis or strategic-evolution module), under identical initial states. Values are mean ± standard deviation at turn 150 over n=10 independent 150-turn games per method. ↑/↓ = higher/lower is better. Best mean per metric in bold ; † marks the metric on which SAGA’s lead is significant against all five baselines (two-sided Mann–Whitney p < 0.05 , Holm-corrected). SAGA’s Score lead is significant over three of five baselines and within noise against CoS and HIMA; Technology is not significantly different from the strongest baselines. Per-comparison tests, medians, and head-to-head win-rates appear in Appendix D.                                                                                                              

> Method Score
> ↑
> Tech
> ↑
> Military
> ↑
> Cities
> ↑
> Buildings
> ↑
> Diplomacy
> ↑
> CoS [2] 47.8 ±20.3 13.3 ±3.4 24.4 ±36.9 5.5 ±6.9 7.5 ±5.6 41.5 ±22.0
> EpicStar [3] 35.4 ±21.5 10.2 ±3.2 23.1 ±28.9 5.1 ±8.4 4.1 ±5.2 38.5 ±17.8 Optimus-2 [5] 41.5 ±10.1 12.6 ±1.9 35.9 ±39.2 4.1 ±3.4 1.9 ±1.8 16.5 ±13.6 HIMA [4] 43.7 ±22.3 10.8 ±3.5 28.9 ±26.9 7.5 ±6.5 3.2 ±2.3 19.5 ±17.7 Mastaba [1] 39.0 ±14.2 12.2 ±3.5 7.8 ±9.4 4.0 ±6.8 2.3 ±2.6 7.0 ±9.5
> SAGA (Ours) 60.7 ±14.0 13.4 ±2.5 59.3 ±40.8 8.9 ±4.5 16.3 ±10.5 †39.5 ±18.0

Table 3: Token consumption breakdown per method, normalised to 150 turns. Input and Output token counts are reported separately (mean ± std over independent runs) to provide a transparent view of the communication overhead and reasoning generation cost for each framework. ↓ = lower is better.                         

> Token CoS EpicStar Optimus-2 HIMA Mastaba SAGA (Ours) Input ↓132 k±46 k213 k±140 k246 k±97 k168 k±94 k14 k±1k258 k±54 k
> Output ↓149 k±21 k58 k±4k66 k±7k219 k±43 k62 k±26 k109 k±14 k
> Total ↓281 k±51 k270 k±140 k312 k±97 k387 k±103 k76 k±26 k367 k±56 k

dump. This cripples the agent’s scene awareness: Score drops from 60 .7 to 45 .3 (−25% ), Cities from 8.9 to 5.0 (−44% ), Buildings from 16 .3 to 10 .3 (−37% ), and Military from 59 .3

to 38 .3 (−35% ). Notably, Input tokens increase from 258 kto 301 k—the Planner must ingest more raw state to com-pensate for the missing scene summary, yet produces worse decisions, illustrating the scene graph’s unique information-compression value. 

Impact of disabling On-demand Tools. The second abla-tion ( w/o Tools ) removes the interactive tool-calling mecha-nism, forcing the Planner to parse dense, un-queried textual states. This is the most severe degradation across all variants: Score collapses from 60 .7 to 30 .9 (−49% ), Tech from 13 .4

to 9.4 (−30% ), and Buildings from 16 .3 to 3.8 (−77% ), in-dicating that on-demand tools are not auxiliary conveniences but indispensable precision instruments for resource tracking and strategic execution. 

Effect of removing the Inner Loop (SetGoal & Ab-stractAgent). The third ablation ( w/o SetGoal & Abstract )dismantles the K-turn cyclic feedback loop. Score drops by 25 .7% (60 .7 → 45 .1), but the most diagnostic signal is the collapse of Tech ( 13 .4 → 5.9, −56% ) and Buildings (16 .3 → 5.9, −64% ): without the SetGoalAgent ’s time-bounded sub-goals and the AbstractAgent ’s semantic compression, the Planner drifts between tasks before com-pleting them, abandoning technology chains mid-research and switching production queues before buildings finish. The residually high Military score ( 67 .5) confirms that reactive, turn-level decisions still fire correctly—but the inability to sustain multi-turn commitments prevents any systematic civi-lizational build-up. 

Token cost is justified, and the SceneGraph even saves it. 

Output tokens fall in every ablation ( 109 k → 94 /88 /78 k ), yet each drop comes with a large performance loss—confirming that SAGA’s richer outputs buy capability, not verbosity. In-put tokens behave differently by component: removing the on-demand Tools ( →133k) or the inner loop ( →206k) lowers input, so the context these modules add is the genuine—and justified—price of precise, goal-directed planning; but re-moving the SceneGraph raises input to 301k, because the Planner must then parse a raw global dump instead of the compact relational summary. The SceneGraph is therefore an input compressor , not an overhead: it lowers input cost and improves decisions at the same time. 

5.4 Backbone Generalization 

A natural concern is whether SAGA’s advantage is tied to a single strong backbone LLM. To test this, we replace the Doubao-Seed-1.8 backbone of Table 2 with the markedly weaker GPT-4o-mini, hold every observation wrapper, con-troller, and tool fixed, and re-run the identical single-game protocol (Map Seed 2025, five 150-turn games, base planner only) against SAGA’s two strongest baselines by Score, CoS and HIMA (the other three, already weaker under the strong backbone in Table 2, are omitted under budget constraints; Table 5). Under this weaker backbone, SAGA still wins every metric. It leads the stronger baseline (CoS) by 78% on Score ( 51 .2

vs. 28 .8), attains roughly 2.4× the Tech and over 3× the Buildings of either baseline, and simultaneously secures the most Cities and the strongest Military. The capability order-ing of Table 2 therefore survives a substantial downgrade of (a)   

> (b) Map Seed 2025 (c) Map Seed 2026
> (d) Map Seed 2027 (e) Map Seed 2028

Figure 3: Cross-game Evolution & Multi-Seed Holistic Validation. (a) Left : All methods are equipped with the same cross-game evolution module. While all methods improve from Game 1 to Game 5, baseline trajectories exhibit pronounced inter-episode oscillation. SAGA (solid red) reaches the highest score at Game 5 ( 90 )—the highest across all method-stage combinations—and leads the field throughout, indicating its architecture is the most reliable substrate for exploiting the injected priors. (b)–(e) Right : Radar charts across 4 map seeds compare Game 1 (dark) with Game 5 (red). The systematic polygon expansion confirms cross-map generalization of the accumulated strategic prior. Table 4: Ablation study on SAGA intra-game component contributions. Each variant removes one component from the full system and is evaluated over n=10 independent Game 1 runs (Map Seed 2025, mean ± std). The cross-game evolution modules (GameAnalyst + Strategic Evolution Chain ) are validated separately via multi-seed radar charts in Figure 3 and are not repeated here.                                                                                  

> Variant Score
> ↑
> Tech
> ↑
> Mil.
> ↑
> Cities
> ↑
> Bldg.
> ↑
> Dipl.
> ↑
> In Token (k) ↓
> Out Token (k) ↓
> Full SAGA 60.7 ±14.0 13.4 ±2.5 59.3 ±40.8 8.9 ±4.5 16.3 ±10.5 39.5 ±18.0 258 ±54 109 ±14
> w/o SceneGraph 45.3 ±9.8 12.3 ±1.6 38.3 ±23.2 5.0 ±2.1 10.3 ±5.7 45.5 ±27.2 301 ±85 94 ±22
> w/o Tools 30.9 ±9.5 9.4 ±2.1 30.0 ±20.5 2.6 ±1.3 3.8 ±4.2 24.0 ±25.1 133 ±10 88 ±24
> w/o SetGoal & Abstract 45.1 ±8.6 5.9 ±2.2 67.5 ±28.0 9.4 ±2.4 5.9 ±3.9 42.5 ±26.9 206 ±52 78 ±13

Table 5: Backbone generalization. The same single-game protocol as Table 2 (Map Seed 2025, mean ± std over five 150-turn games, base planner only), but with the backbone LLM swapped from the strong Doubao-Seed-1.8 to the markedly weaker GPT-4o-mini. All observation wrappers, controllers, and tools are held fixed; only the backbone changes. SAGA leads on all six metrics. Best per metric in bold .                                                       

> Method Score
> ↑
> Tech
> ↑
> Military
> ↑
> Cities
> ↑
> Buildings
> ↑
> Diplomacy
> ↑
> CoS [2] 28.8 ±16.3 4.6 ±0.5 21.4 ±25.6 6.6 ±7.7 2.0 ±2.3 0.0 ±0.0 HIMA [4] 27.4 ±15.0 4.8 ±1.2 26.2 ±26.9 7.0 ±6.9 1.6 ±1.5 0.0 ±0.0
> SAGA (Ours) 51.2 ±19.5 11.4 ±1.6 39.6 ±21.0 9.8 ±6.6 6.8 ±3.8 10.0 ±20.0

the reasoning engine: structured scene-aware perception and goal-directed execution help regardless of backbone strength, rather than merely amplifying an already-capable LLM. As expected, absolute performance drops relative to Doubao (SAGA Score 60 .7 → 51 .2), and the large Mili-tary variance ( 39 .6 ± 21 .0) reflects mid-game territory losses to pirate and AI incursions that a small model recovers from unevenly. Diplomacy nearly vanishes for all three methods—only SAGA brokers a single alliance across the fifteen games—suggesting that multi-party treaty formation is the first capability to exceed a weak backbone’s reasoning ceiling. We examine that ceiling directly in Appendix H: a cross-game evolution case study on a deliberately resource-poor map (Map Seed 2029) shows that even a correct distilled strategy delivers only muted gains once the backbone—not the strategy—becomes the binding constraint on decision quality. 

5.5 Qualitative Analysis and Discussion 

The cross-game evolution loop of SAGA produces holis-tic, multi-dimensional civilizational improvement. Af-ter each episode, the GameAnalyst and Strategic Evolution Chain jointly extract structured causal chains from the game record—diagnosing root causes of underperformance across expansion, development, and mili-tary defense simultaneously—and encode these lessons into a strategic prior that is injected at the start of the next game. As a result, successive episodes reflect broad capa-bility growth—most visibly on Score, Military, Cities, and Buildings—as confirmed by the systematic polygon expan-sion in Figure 3(b)–(e) across all four map seeds. This con-trasts sharply with baseline trajectories, which oscillate or stagnate despite receiving the same evolution chain, reveal-ing that structured intra-game execution is a prerequisite for effective cross-game knowledge exploitation. 

Limitations. First, the hierarchical design introduces in-put token redundancy: overlapping contextual informa-tion is independently supplied to the SetGoalAgent ,

PlannerAgent , and AbstractAgent each cycle, inflat-ing input costs beyond what strict role decomposition would require. From an agent role-division perspective, shared memory structures or targeted information routing could substantially reduce this overhead without sacrificing deci-sion quality—a direction we leave to future work. Second, CivRealm’s stochasticity is not fully resolved by fixing the map seed. While a fixed seed ensures identical resource dis-tributions, spawn locations, and rival civilization starting po-sitions, barbarian and pirate emergence times and locations remain fully random. This produces high-variance outcomes: episodes with early barbarian pressure yield markedly lower scores than otherwise identical episodes without it, a factor that contributes directly to the large standard deviations ob-served across all methods (e.g., Military std. >40). Although our 10-trial protocol substantially mitigates this noise, the residual environmental randomness remains a non-negligible confound that must be acknowledged when interpreting met-ric differences. Third, a single 150-turn episode is too short to get every multi-domain trade-off right: no amount of prompt engineering or injected prior knowledge lets the base plan-ner perfectly balance expansion, infrastructure, defense, and research within one game, so overcorrection —most visibly over-militarization—is a largely unavoidable single-game ar-tifact. Our two lowest-scoring Seed-2025 episodes (Score 47 )make this concrete: one looped core cities on redundant units—starving Courthouses, Marketplaces, and Wonders— while frontier cities received garrisons but never City Walls or Barracks and lost three cities late-game; the other locked into a defensive posture under sustained barbarian pressure, holding science at 20% , stalling its technology chain, and slipping from Monarchy back to Despotism. Critically, this is exactly the failure the cross-game evolution loop (§4.4) is designed to repair: the GameAnalyst post-mortem di-agnoses the over-militarization and feeds explicit corrective priors— core cities must prioritize infrastructure; one veteran unit behind City Walls outvalues four raw units —into the next episode. Single-game overcorrection is thus a structural property of the planning horizon rather than a defect unique to SAGA; the outer loop’s role is to convert these unavoidable single-game mistakes into cross-game corrections—bounded, as the weak-backbone study shows (Appendix H), by how fully the planner can act on that advice. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We presented SAGA, a tool-augmented, map-enhanced LLM multi-agent framework for long-horizon strategy planning. By replacing monolithic state dumps with on-demand tool queries, enriching unit observations with spatial scene-graph contexts, and coupling short-term goal quantification with cross-game strategic evolution, SAGA attains the highest mean on every civilizational metric except Diplomacy (Score, Technology, Military, Cities, and Buildings)—a clear and consistent lead in central tendency. Under CivRealm’s heavy-tailed variance this lead is statistically robust on infrastructure (Buildings) and directionally stable on Score, where SAGA wins at least 72% of head-to-head games against the two strongest baselines. Our results suggest that the key bottle-neck in LLM strategic planning is not raw reasoning capabil-ity but rather information architecture : how observations are structured, how decisions are decoupled, and how feedback is accumulated over time. Future work includes: (i) extending SAGA to multi-agent competitive settings where multiple LLM-controlled civi-lizations compete simultaneously, enabling richer inter-agent strategic interaction; (ii) integrating vision-language mod-els for direct map image interpretation, replacing the hand-crafted scene-graph rendering with end-to-end spatial percep-tion; and (iii) distilling repetitive intra-game decisions into lightweight RL policies via reward shaping, shifting LLM reasoning cost from per-turn inference to a one-time train-ing phase and directly addressing the input token overhead identified as a current limitation. 

# References 

[1] Siyuan Qi et al. CivRealm: A learning and reasoning odyssey in Civilization for decision-making agents. In 

Proc. ICLR , 2024. [2] Weiyu Ma et al. Large language models play StarCraft II: Benchmarks and a chain of summarization approach. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2024. [3] Yi Wu and Zhimin Hu. LLMs are not good strate-gists, yet memory-enhanced agency boosts reasoning. In ICLR Workshop on Reasoning and Planning for LLMs , 2025. [4] Daechul Ahn, San Kim, and Jonghyun Choi. Society of mind meets real-time strategy: A hierarchical multi-agent framework for strategic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15567 , 2025. [5] Zaijing Li et al. Optimus-2: Multimodal Minecraft agent with goal-observation-action conditioned policy. In Proc. CVPR , 2025. [6] Rong Wu et al. EvolveR: Self-evolving LLM agents through an experience-driven lifecycle. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04843 , 2025. [7] Yifu Guo et al. SE-Agent: Self-evolution trajectory optimization in multi-step reasoning with LLM-based agents. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2025. [8] Wanjia Zhao, Mert Yuksekgonul, Shirley Wu, and James Zou. SiriuS: Self-improving multi-agent systems via bootstrapped reasoning. In Advances in NeurIPS ,2025. [9] Nolan Bard et al. The Hanabi challenge: A new fron-tier for AI research. Artificial Intelligence , 280:103216, 2020. [10] Joel Z. Leibo et al. Scalable evaluation of multi-agent re-inforcement learning with Melting Pot. In Proc. ICML ,pp. 6187–6199, 2021. [11] Christopher Berner et al. Dota 2 with large scale deep re-inforcement learning. Technical report, OpenAI, 2019. [12] Oriol Vinyals et al. Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature ,575(7782):350–354, 2019. [13] Linxi Fan et al. MineDojo: Building open-ended embod-ied agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2022. [14] Philip Paquette et al. No-press Diplomacy: Modeling multi-agent gameplay. In Advances in NeurIPS , 32, 2019. [15] Shuyan Zhou et al. WebArena: A realistic web environ-ment for building autonomous agents. In Proc. ICLR ,2024. [16] Tianbao Xie et al. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environ-ments. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2024. [17] Jen-tse Huang et al. GAMA-Bench: Evaluating LLMs’ gaming ability in multi-agent environments. In Proc. ICLR , 2025. [18] Frank F. Xu et al. TheAgentCompany: Benchmarking LLM agents on consequential real-world tasks. In Ad-vances in NeurIPS , 2025. [19] Shunyu Yao et al. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Proc. ICLR , 2023. [20] Guanzhi Wang et al. Voyager: An open-ended embod-ied agent with large language models. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2023. [21] Sirui Hong et al. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In Proc. ICLR ,2024. [22] Shanshan Gong et al. CoLLAB: Coordinating collabo-rative LLM-based agents for mathematical reasoning. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2025. [23] Rui Yang et al. EmbodiedBench: Comprehensive bench-marking multi-modal large language models for embod-ied decision making. In Proc. ICML , 2025. [24] Noah Shinn et al. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in NeurIPS ,2023. [25] Aman Madaan et al. Self-Refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in NeurIPS , 2023. Technical Appendix 

# A Interactive Environment Comparison 

Table 6 provides a structured comparison of representative interactive decision-making environments across ten criteria relevant to complex strategy research. CivRealm is the only environment satisfying all ten simultaneously, motivating its use as our primary benchmark. 

# B Experimental Setup Details & Hyperparameters 

In this section, we provide detailed justifications for the core hyperparameters governing the evaluation protocol of the SAGA framework. 

Maximum 150 Turns ( T = 150 ). We truncate all inde-pendent runs at turn 150. In FreeCiv, the early-to-mid game (turns 1-150) represents the most critical and strategically dense phase of civilization development, requiring agents to navigate exploration, initial city foundation, technology bootstrapping, and early military encounters. By turn 150, the structural foundation of the civilization is firmly established. Evaluating beyond 150 turns heavily subjects the agent to the snowball effect (where early advantages exponentially dic-tate late-game success) and substantially increases inference cost without providing proportionally novel insights into the planner’s fundamental reasoning capabilities. 

Retrieval Kr = 6 . For the cross-game strategic evolution module, we set the retrieval budget to Kr = 6 past experi-ences. Through preliminary ablation, we found that Kr < 4

provides insufficient strategic diversity, often failing to re-trieve relevant counter-strategies for specific map seeds or enemy behaviors. Conversely, Kr > 8 exceeds the effective context window of the reasoning LLM (triggering the “lost in the middle” phenomenon) and dilutes the semantic weight of the most critical experiences. Kr = 6 strikes the optimal balance between historical coverage and context tractability. 

10 Independent Runs. To rigorously evaluate the baseline performance, we expand our evaluation up to 10 independent trials per algorithm on the same map seed. Strategy games like CivRealm contain significant inherent stochasticity (e.g., barbarian spawns, randomized combat outcomes, and enemy AI behavioral variance). Evaluating only 3-5 runs can lead to high variance in the reported metrics. A 10-run protocol— the largest budget-feasible under CivRealm’s high per-game cost—substantially suppresses single-episode noise, support-ing our reading that SAGA’s consistent mean lead reflects strategic capability rather than stochastic luck, even where the per-metric gap against the two strongest baselines remains within the environment’s intrinsic variance. 

# C Evaluation Metric Definitions 

All seven metrics are evaluated at turn 150 of each episode. Table 7 provides precise definitions; the first six capture civ-ilization development breadth, while the seventh measures computational cost. 

Significance of Core Metrics. Score is the holistic mea-sure of civilizational capability and is our primary outcome. Among the component metrics, Buildings is the most in-formative differentiator: it captures the infrastructure invest-ment that compounds across growth, research, and defense, is scored independently of Score, and is the one dimension on which SAGA significantly surpasses every baseline (Ap-pendix D). Military Power reflects survivability but is ex-tremely high-variance under CivRealm’s stochastic combat and barbarian raids (its standard deviation often exceeds its mean), and Diplomacy is largely exploration-driven; we therefore report both for completeness but do not rest our central claims on them. The Score formula aggregates pop-ulation across cities, researched technologies, and Wonder scores—so Technology and city-driven population are partly coupled to Score, whereas Buildings and Diplomacy are scored independently. Table 6: Comparison of interactive environments. CivRealm is the only environment satisfying all ten criteria simultaneously.                                                                                                                         

> Environment Imperfect info Stochastic Multi-goal Dynamic space Multi-agent General-sum Changing players Comm. Tensor & Lang. Long-Horizon
> Hanabi [9] ✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✓✗✗
> Diplomacy [14] ✗✗✗✗✓✗✓✓✓✓
> Melting Pot [10] ✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✗
> Dota 2 [11] ✓✓✗✓✓✗✗✗✗✓
> StarCraft II [12] ✓✗✗✓✓✗✗✗✗✓
> MineDojo [13] ✓✓✓✓✗✓✗✗✓✓
> WebArena [15] ✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✗✗
> OSWorld [16] ✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✗✗
> GAMA-Bench [17] ✓✓✗✗✓✓✗✓✗✗
> TheAgentCompany [18] ✓✓✓✗✓✗✗✓✓✓
> CivRealm [1] ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓

Table 7: Evaluation metric definitions. All values are snapshot readings at the end of turn 150. Diplomacy is a custom milestone metric and Token Consumption is measured on the LLM side; the remaining five derive from FreeCiv game internals. ↑ = higher is better, ↓ = lower is better. 

Metric Dir. Definition Score ↑ FreeCiv built-in composite score at the end of turn 150, computed as the weighted sum of total population across all surviving cities, number of technologies researched, and accumulated Wonder scores. It serves as the primary holistic measure of civilizational development. 

Technology ↑ Number of distinct technologies researched by turn 150. Each technology is counted once regardless of how many cities benefit. 

Military Power ↑ Sum of the attack-strength values of all surviving owned military units at the end of turn 150. Units destroyed in combat are not counted; only units alive at episode termination are included, weighted by their base attack rating in the FreeCiv classic ruleset. A stronger military force indicates a greater capacity to defend the civilization against enemy raids and protect productive cities from destruction. 

Cities ↑ Number of cities still owned at the end of turn 150. Cities captured or destroyed before turn 150 are not counted. City count is a proxy for population potential: each city independently produces food, production, and science, so a larger city base translates directly to faster growth, higher research output, and greater resource accumulation in subsequent turns. 

Buildings ↑ Total number of buildings present across all surviving owned cities at the end of turn 150. Buildings in cities that were captured or razed before turn 150 are not included; World Wonders count as one building each. Buildings provide compounding bonuses across all dimensions of civilizational development—Granaries accelerate population growth, Libraries and Marketplaces boost science and gold output, and Barracks improve military unit quality—making total building count a reliable indicator of long-term infrastructure investment. 

Diplomacy ↑ Custom milestone score reflecting de-escalation progress with each AI opponent. Points are awarded cumulatively for each milestone reached: Ceasefire (+5 pts), Armistice (+10 pts), Peace (+15 pts), and Alliance (+20 pts), for a maximum of 50 pts per AI opponent. This metric is not provided by the FreeCiv engine and is computed by post-processing the diplomatic-state log. 

Token Consumption ↓ Total LLM input and output token counts over 150 turns, normalized to a single episode. Detailed counting methodology per method is given in Appendix G. 

# D Distribution-Aware Statistics and Significance Tests 

Because CivRealm scores are heavy-tailed—a single fortu-nate or catastrophic episode shifts the mean substantially— we complement the mean ± std of Table 2 with rank-based and distribution-aware statistics. For each metric we run a two-sided Mann–Whitney U test of SAGA against each baseline and report the median with inter-quartile range 

[P25 , P75] and the head-to-head win-rate—the probability that a random SAGA game outscores a random baseline game, i.e. the common-language effect size (Table 8). 

Where SAGA’s advantage is significant. Summarizing the per-metric Mann–Whitney tests against the five baselines (significant at p < 0.05 ): Buildings , 5/5 baselines—the only metric that survives Holm correction within its per-metric family, and 4/5 under the stricter 30 -comparison family-wise correction (the CoS comparison, p=0 .037 , becomes suggestive); Cities , 4/5 (all but HIMA); Score , 3/5 (not significant against CoS and HIMA); Military , 3/5 (CoS, EpicStar, Mastaba); Diplomacy , 3/5 (not significant against CoS and EpicStar, consistent with its exploration-driven vari-ance noted in Appendix C); and Technology , 1/5 (only Epic-Star; tied with the four stronger baselines). Infrastructure is therefore the statistically robust core of SAGA’s improve-Table 8: Distribution-aware statistics and pairwise significance for the two headline metrics (Map Seed 2025; n=10 per method). For each baseline we report the two-sided Mann–Whitney p against SAGA and the head-to-head win-rate. Medians with [P25 , P75] complement the means of Table 2 under CivRealm’s heavy-tailed distribution. SAGA significantly leads all 

baselines on Buildings; on Score it significantly leads the weaker three but lies within noise against CoS and HIMA. Significant cells ( p < 0.05 ) in bold .                                                    

> Score Buildings Method nMed. [P25, P75] pvs Ours Win% Med. [P25, P75] pvs Ours Win%
> SAGA (Ours) 10 55.5 [50.0, 71.5] ——11.5 [8.8, 19.2] ——CoS 10 42.5 [34.0, 55.8] 0.064 75% 5.5 [2.5, 11.2] 0.037 78% EpicStar 10 28.0 [23.8, 33.5] 0.003 90% 2.0 [1.0, 4.0] 0.001 92% Optimus-2 10 40.5 [38.0, 44.8] 0.004 89% 1.0 [1.0, 2.0] <0.001 98% HIMA 10 36.5 [27.2, 55.8] 0.096 72% 2.5 [1.2, 4.5] <0.001 97% Mastaba 10 40.0 [27.5, 48.8] 0.007 86% 1.0 [1.0, 2.0] <0.001 97%

ment; its Score advantage is large and consistent in the mean but, against the two strongest baselines, lies within the en-vironment’s intrinsic noise—which we state plainly rather than obscure behind aggregate means. With five baselines and six metrics ( 30 comparisons), individual p-values near 

0.05 should be read as suggestive; the Buildings result is the one that best survives family-wise correction, remaining significant against four of five baselines even under the full 

30 -comparison family. 

# E Algorithm Framework Pseudocode 

Algorithm 1 provides the formal pseudocode for the SAGA framework, illustrating the integration of the Scene Graph, Tool-Augmented Planner, and Dual-Horizon Feedback Loop across both intra-game execution and cross-game evolution. 

# F Capability Comparison 

In this appendix, we provide a detailed qualitative compari-son of various LLM-based strategy agents. As the complexity of environments like CivRealm scales, different architec-tural paradigms have emerged to handle vast state spaces, long-horizon planning, and cross-episode strategic evolution. Table 9 outlines these distinctions, contrasting our approach against state-of-the-art baselines across five core design di-mensions. Algorithm 1: SAGA Framework Execution 

Require: N games, max turns Tmax , evaluation interval 

K = 6 . 

> 1:

Init evolution_chain ← ∅ . 

> 2:

for game i = 1 to N do  

> 3:

Read game_report and evolution_chain to update strategic prior.  

> 4:

t ← 0; tlast_eval ← 0 

> 5:

while game is not over and t < T max do  

> 6:

1. Observation: Construct Scene Graph G from state St; extract context Ct. 

> 7:

if t − tlast_eval ≥ K or Emergency then  

> 8:

2. Inner Loop: AbstractAgent summarizes logs; SetGoalAgent updates sub-goals.  

> 9:

tlast_eval ← t 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

3. Planning: Planner fetches domain data via Tools, then partitions directives D for 6 domains.  

> 12:

4. Execution: Execute Ddiplomacy serially; dis-patch others concurrently. Log actions.  

> 13:

t ← t + 1  

> 14:

end while  

> 15:

5. Outer Loop: GameAnalyst generates 

game_report ; PreGameStrategist updates 

evolution_chain . 

> 16:

end for Table 9: Qualitative paradigm comparison of LLM strategy agents across five design dimensions. Each cell names the concrete mechanism employed, enabling direct comparison of architectural choices rather than binary feature presence.                                              

> Method Input State Action Space Planning Horizon Cross-Game Learn. Action Constraints
> CoS [2] Rolling summary Monolithic output Per-turn reactive Trace replay Prompt-based EpicStar [3] Episodic retrieval Monolithic output Per-turn reactive Episodic RAG Prompt-based Optimus-2 [5] Full-state injection Dual-track sequence Phase milestones Trace replay Prompt-based HIMA [4] Hierarchical filtering 3-advisor council Per-turn reactive Static profiling Prompt-based Mastaba [1] Pyramid hawk-eye Advisor + workers Per-turn reactive Manual + hist. RAG API list + prompt
> SAGA (Ours) Graph + Tool pull 6-way decoupled Periodic + Interrupt Causal distillation Schema-constrained
> Key distinctions. State: CoS compresses turn history; EpicStar retrieves similar past episodes; Mastaba condenses the map into a pyramid hawk-eye view with per-unit tactical zoom; SAGA builds a relational graph and fetches numeric data only on demand—avoiding both stale context and token inflation. Action & Horizon: Baselines emit a single unified plan per turn or delegate via advisor hierarchies; SAGA routes decisions to six fully independent specialist controllers (five concurrent, diplomacy serialized) and enforces a separate periodic subgoal loop with interrupt. Learning & Constraints: Unlike trace replay, semantic RAG, or manual-document retrieval (Mastaba), our causal distillation extracts transferable strategic rules. Environment-level action-mask validation is shared infrastructure across all methods; SAGA’s distinction is that its structured output schema constrains the Planner to currently-legal actions (e.g., city production restricted to Acity (τt)), reducing illegal proposals upstream of the mask rather than relying on prompt-injected behavioral warnings.

# G Token Consumption Analysis 

This section details the specific computation mechanics for the token consumption analysis reported in Table 3. To avoid double counting and maintain fairness across structurally diverse agent frameworks, we adhere to the following nor-malization principles: • Input Tokens : Represents all tokens strictly parsed or embedded within the final user/system prompts sent to the decision-making model. • Output Tokens : Represents all raw generation tokens emitted by the LLMs acting as the main decision interface. 

Method-Specific Calculation Logic. For CoS , all observa-tions and historical rolling summaries are computed as Input. 

EpicStar employs a local TF-IDF and heuristic working memory; since these memories are constructed locally with-out LLM inference, their text is entirely attributed to the Input prompt without inflating the Output cost. Optimus-2 utilizes a sub-LLM to summarize behaviors, and to fairly portray the system-level cost, these generated sub-goals and behavioral summaries are counted as Input when fed to the main action loop. HIMA operates a multi-agent council system where three advisors and one synthesizer interact in parallel; the aggregate of all advisor outputs forms a substantial portion of the output token cost per turn. Mastaba builds an extremely compact global state sketch (turn number, unit/city counts, war-state flag, and economic rates) from raw observations using a rule-based aggregator, bypassing any LLM-generated intermediate representation. This sketch typically contains fewer than 150 tokens, which explains its ultra-low input to-ken count ( 14 k±1k) compared to all other baselines. Finally, for SAGA (Ours) , we directly calculate the input and output tokens by summing the usage across the SetGoalAgent ,

AbstractAgent , and the central Planner. By adopting this holistic accounting, we capture the true system-level cost of our hierarchical design, demonstrating that while the aux-iliary SetGoal and Abstract agents add modest token overhead, they drastically reduce the Planner’s output burden by offloading complex strategic reasoning. 

# H Cross-Backbone Evolution Case Study (Map Seed 2029) 

This case study supports the backbone-generalization analy-sis of §5.4 by asking a sharper question: when the backbone itself is weak, does cross-game evolution still pay off? We run a five-game evolution chain (G1 →G5) under GPT-4o-mini on Map Seed 2029 —a deliberately harsh, resource-poor map dominated by desert, ocean, and swamp tiles that sharply re-stricts viable city sites—in stark contrast to the resource-rich Map Seed 2025 used throughout the main results. The full evolution loop is enabled ( GameAnalyst post-mortem +

injected pre-game strategic prior); all three methods share identical observation, controller, tool, and evolution-chain infrastructure, so only the planner layer differs. Table 10 re-ports the per-game Final Score and surviving city count for each method, and Figure 4 plots the corresponding Score trajectory. Two findings stand out. First, even with the evolution loop active, the gains are non-monotonic and muted. SAGA peaks at G3 (Score 61 : a 14 -tech run that transitions into Monar-chy and erects nineteen buildings) but regresses to 37 /35 

at G4/G5, where it lapses back into Despotism and over-militarizes at the expense of technology and construction (Tech 14 → 8 → 5). The post-mortem correctly diagnoses this drift each episode and injects a sound corrective prior, yet the GPT-4o-mini planner cannot reliably act on it—a direct illustration that a weak backbone’s decision ceiling , rather than the quality of the distilled advice, becomes the binding constraint. Even a correct strategy helps only as much as the executor can carry it out. Second, this ceiling sits far lower on a resource-poor map. Both absolute scores and inter-game improvements are markedly smaller than under the resource-rich Seed 2025 main experiment, and the two baselines repeatedly collapse Table 10: Cross-backbone evolution on the resource-poor Map Seed 2029 (GPT-4o-mini, evolution loop enabled, Final values per game). SAGA records the highest Score and the largest surviving territory in every game and never collapses, whereas both baselines repeatedly fall to zero cities. Best per game in bold .                                     

> Method G1 G2 G3 G4 G5
> Score (Final) SAGA 31 37 61 37 35
> HIMA 812 559CoS 525 17 914
> City count (Final) SAGA 58779
> HIMA 03114CoS 06002

Figure 4: GPT-4o-mini evolution trajectory on Map Seed 2029. Final Score across the five-game evolution chain (G1 →G5) on the resource-poor map. SAGA (solid red) dom-inates both baselines at every step and peaks at G3 (Score 61 )before regressing as it lapses back into Despotism. The weak backbone makes gains non-monotonic , yet SAGA never drops into the oscillating low band occupied by HIMA and CoS—structured execution keeps it consistently ahead even when evolution’s headroom is throttled. to zero surviving cities (CoS at G1/G3/G4, HIMA at G1). The scarce terrain leaves almost no margin for the recovery maneuvers that a stronger backbone would execute automati-cally. Despite these limits, the relative picture is unchanged: SAGA records the highest Score and the largest surviving ter-ritory in every game and never suffers civilizational collapse, whereas the baselines oscillate between marginal survival and total wipe-out. Structured execution thus remains advan-tageous even when evolution’s headroom is throttled by a weak backbone—it is precisely what keeps the agent alive long enough for any strategic prior to matter at all. 

# I Implementation Details 

I.1 Shared Infrastructure 

All methods share the same LLM backbone (Doubao-Seed-1.8) and execution infrastructure. The Planner and all entity controllers (City, Unit, Gov, Tech, Diplomacy) are built on a unified ReActAgent wrapper that writes action logs to per-run SQLite databases in WAL mode, enabling concurrent multi-threaded reads without contention. All tool-calling planners (SAGA, CoS, HIMA, Optimus-2) apply a maximum of 5 sequential tool-call iterations per planning step, after which a forced-finalization message is injected to obtain a valid JSON output. This prevents infinite tool-call loops on complex states while still allowing multi-step information gathering. All controllers validate generated actions against the environment’s available_actions 

mask before execution; illegal actions trigger an inline retry without advancing the game clock, ensuring the comparison is not confounded by action legality failures. 

Inference parameters. All LLM agents query the same provider endpoint with a per-call output cap of 4096 to-kens, a rolling chat-history window of 20 messages, and up to 3 automatic retries on transport errors. Decoding uses low-temperature, near-deterministic sampling held identical across all methods; the exact temperature and top-p values are fixed in—and released with—our configuration files, so the backbone and sampling regime stay constant across the comparison. 

I.2 SAGA Configuration 

Inner-loop scheduler. The AbstractAgent and 

SetGoalAgent are invoked every K = 6 turns by default. In addition, an event-driven emergency interrupt triggers an immediate re-evaluation when any of the following conditions is detected: (i) an increase in visible enemy unit count; (ii) enemy military units entering a city’s proximity radius; (iii) a newly discovered civilization or player; (iv) the loss of a friendly city. The interrupt is subject to a 5-turn cooldown to prevent cascading re-evaluations that would inflate token consumption. 

SceneGraph topology. The graph is rebuilt from scratch every turn in <10 ms (CPU). Beyond the standard within-radius edges, two global structural rules are applied: (i) every allied unit maintains a permanent long-range directed edge to its nearest friendly city regardless of map distance, preventing Settlers from losing navigation context in unexplored regions; (ii) every allied military unit maintains directed edges to all visible enemy cities as attack-route anchors. Edge distances are discretized into three levels— close (< 3 tiles), medium 

(< 10 tiles), and far (≥ 10 tiles)—to reduce the cognitive load of parsing raw coordinate differences for the LLM. 

Concurrency and rate limiting. The Thread-PoolExecutor runs up to 20 workers, and a

threading.Semaphore(20) caps the number of simultaneously active LLM calls at 20 , preventing API rate-limit exhaustion during heavy mid-game turns with many concurrent city and unit controllers. I.3 Baseline-Specific Configuration 

CoS [ 2]. Implements an 8-stage Chain-of-Summarization (CoS) prompting pipeline each turn. The sliding history win-dow retains the most recent 1 L1-summary (reduced from 5 in the original paper to fit the CivRealm token budget). Plan-ner output is capped at 3,000 tokens with a 1,500-word hard limit enforced via prompt instruction to prevent late-game generation timeouts. 

EpicStar [ 3 ]. The episodic memory module stores up to 

200 episodes per game and retrieves the top-k=3 most rele-vant past episodes using TF-IDF cosine similarity (vocabu-lary capped at max_features=500 ). A keyword-overlap fallback is activated when sklearn is unavailable. Working memory carries the current observation summary and the single most recent planning decision. 

Optimus-2 [ 5 ]. Maintains an active sub-goal and a priori-tized sub-goal queue. Re-planning is triggered every 5 turns 

or after the active sub-goal has been held for 10 consecu-tive turns without progression, whichever comes first. The observation history window covers 3 L1-summaries . On non-replan turns, a lightweight passthrough response propagates the unchanged active sub-goal to all downstream controllers, avoiding redundant LLM calls. 

HIMA [ 4]. Three parallel advisors— Expansion & Econ-omy , Military & Defense , and Technology & Development —each independently generate proposals via chain-of-thought reasoning. A Strategic Planner (SP) then fuses the three pro-posals into a single unified plan. History window: 1 L1-summary . Total LLM calls per turn: 3 (advisors, run in parallel via ThreadPoolExecutor ) + 1 (SP fusion) =

4, which explains HIMA’s elevated output token count in Table 3. 

Mastaba [ 1]. Mastaba employs a flat two-level informa-tion architecture: a single Advisor generates a unified natural-language suggestion from a compressed global sketch, which is then broadcast verbatim to all entity controllers (work-ers, military, settlers) as their sole strategic directive. The global sketch is assembled by a rule-based aggregator that counts unit types, city sizes, and war state—without any LLM inference—and serializes the result into a compact string ( <150 tokens). This design explains Mastaba’s excep-tionally low token footprint (Table 3). There is no per-entity observation or context window; all controllers receive the identical advisor broadcast, which limits strategic specificity but reduces API cost to a single LLM call per turn. Max output tokens: 2,500 ; stateful fallback re-uses the last valid suggestion if the current turn’s LLM call fails. 

# J Prompt Templates and SceneGraph Rendering 

We present representative excerpts of the four core prompt templates used in SAGA. Full prompts contain extensive game-mechanic rules and self-check chains; here we show only the structural skeleton and the most design-critical di-rectives. All prompts use a system + user two-message format and receive structured JSON output. 

J.1 Pre-Game Strategic Analyst 

Invoked once before each game using all prior 

game_analysis_report.json files. Generates a strategic_evolution_chain.md that summa-rizes cross-game lessons.                                                          

> Pre-Game Analyst — System Prompt (Condensed)
> You are the Chief Strategic Architect for the FreeCiv AI. Perform an "Evolutionary Forensic Analysis" across historical game outcomes. For EVERY game, you MUST provide: inherited_strategy: "Adopted the [Strategy] from previous [Game N]" strategic_modification: "Due to failure of [Game N] in [Reason], ..." post_adjustment_successes: Acknowledge measurable improvements. deep_root_cause: Chain-of-Failure causal trace (5 levels minimum). upcoming_game_expectations: Frame as SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS, not rigid rules. e.g. "Before switching to SURVIVAL, ask: Has acity actually been lost?" Output JSON: {evolution_chain, persistent_failures, upcoming_game_expectations, ...}

J.2 SetGoal Agent (Strategic Director) 

Called every K turns to set empire-level strate-gic mode and 5-turn sub-goals. Receives two cross-game inputs: the AbstractAgent ’s natural-language summary of recent in-game events, and the 

strategic_evolution_chain.md compiled by the Pre-Game Analyst.                                                                             

> SetGoal Agent — System Prompt (Condensed)
> You are the Strategic Director. Every Kturns you set empire-level strategic direction. Review the AbstractAgent’s event summary and the strategic evolution chain before deciding. Apply lessons from prior games; adapt to the current situation. Strategic mode choices: EXPANSION |CONSOLIDATION |SURVIVAL |OFFENSE SURVIVAL is appropriate only when a city has been lost or confirmed enemy combat units are actively threatening cities. Diplomatic war status alone, or sighting non-combat units, does not warrant SURVIVAL mode. Government transition: initiate arevolution only after the target government technology has been confirmed as fully researched. Do not conflate researching

prerequisite technologies with having unlocked the target form of government. Output JSON: {thoughts, current_mode, short_term_goals: {city_building_goal, military_goal, tech, gov, dipl}} 

J.3 Planner Agent (Operational Planner) 

Called every turn to translate SetGoal directives into per-city and per-unit assignments. Has access to three on-demand query tools: query_city_metrics ,

query_army_roster , and query_tech_status .The Planner decides when and whether to invoke each tool based on what information it needs; unused tools may be skipped. 

Planner Agent — System Prompt (Condensed) 

You are the Operational Planner. Translate SetGoal objectives into concrete per-city production assignments and per-unit movement directives. Three query tools are available: query_army_roster returns the current unit and garrison table; query_city_metrics returns economic breakdowns and recent production history; query_tech_status returns researched technologies and unlocked items. Invoke whichever tools are needed to ground your plan in real game state before writing directives. Two-pass planning: Pass 1 -- distill empire-level needs from SetGoal into a prioritised list. Pass 2 -- for each city, check its history and current state, then assign the most appropriate production item from its available build list. Output JSON: {thoughts, suggestion: {city, city_garrison_plan, civilian_plan, military_plan}}. Max 1500 chars total. 

J.4 Unit Controller (Executor) 

One instance per entity (Settler, Worker, Military unit). Re-ceives the Planner’s per-unit directive and selects a single action from the environment’s available_actions list. 

Unit Controller — System + Chat Prompt (Condensed) 

You are a tactical EXECUTOR. Your SOLE purpose is to EXECUTE the advisor’s plan. NO STRATEGIC THINKING. ACTION OVER INACTION. STRICT BREVITY (reasoning <15 words). For Settlers -- Speed over perfection: Step 1: Distance ≥4 tiles from nearest city? → Proceed to Step 2. 

Step 2: Tile quality (Excellent/Good/Acceptable)? → BUILD NOW. Rule: Moved 5+ turns without building? →

BUILD NOW regardless. For Military -- Fortify rules: fortify ONLY valid if unit has remaining MP AND has NOT moved this turn. If fortify NOT in available_actions →

use keep activity. NEVER retreat. Output JSON: {“thoughts”: {“reasoning”: ..., “plan”: ...}, “action”: “<exact string>”} 

J.5 SceneGraph Language Rendering Example 

Below is a representative SceneGraph.invoke() output for a Settler at turn 42. The graph is queried with entity ID 

unit_101 and returns a compact spatial description that is appended to the controller’s observation: 

SceneGraph Output — Settler (ID: 101) at Turn 42 

You are a Settler. Empire Stronghold: your nearest friendly city Rome (ID: 116) medium (7 tiles) to the South. allied city Athens (ID: 120) far (12 tiles) to the SouthEast. Minor Tribe Village (ID: hut_14_22) close (2 tiles) to the NorthEast. allied Warrior (ID: 52) close (1 tile) to the East. 

The Empire Stronghold tag (global-anchor edge) prevents the Settler from drifting away from the empire even in un-explored territory. The Minor Tribe Village entry (within radius-8 hut edge) prompts the controller to prioritize cap-turing the bonus before continuing expansion. All distance descriptions use the discretized levels ( close /medium /far )defined in Appendix I. 

J.6 City Controller (City Governor) 

One instance per city; receives the Planner’s per-city pro-duction directive and selects from the available action list. Implements a four-layer decision authority: (1) obey Planner by default; (2) anti-switching (avoid production switch if shields > 0 unless emergency keyword or enemy visible); (3) quality override (item unavailable, starvation, or disorder); (4) autonomous fallback in priority order. 

City Controller — System Prompt (Condensed) 

You are the City Governor. Execute the Planner’s assignment while protecting the city from starvation, disorder, and ungarrisoned threats. Layer 1 -- OBEY PLANNER: Build what the Planner assigns. Layer 2 -- ANTI-SWITCHING: Do NOT change production if shields > 0, UNLESS emergency (DEFEND/THREAT keyword, enemy visible, city loss imminent). Layer 3 -- QUALITY OVERRIDE: Switch if item not in available_actions, causes Food Surplus < 0, or city is in Disorder. Layer 4 -- AUTONOMOUS FALLBACK: Available Actions. Output JSON: {“thoughts”: ..., “action”: “<exact string>”} 

J.7 Abstract Agent (Strategic Supervisor) 

Invoked every K turns to compress recent SQLite action logs into a structured semantic summary and evaluate short-term goal completion per domain. Outputs corrective directives that ground the subsequent SetGoalAgent call. 

Abstract Agent — System Prompt (Condensed) 

You are the Strategic Supervisor. Summarize recent events and evaluate short-term goals for each domain (city, unit, tech, dipl, gov). Priority analysis order: 0. Diplomatic Events -- check first: wars declared, treaties, alliances. 0.5. Threat Analysis -- lost city =CRITICAL; distinguish combat vs. non-combat units before raising military alert. 1. Root Cause -- tax rate, resource allocation, unit utilization. 2. Production & Garrison Verification --compare city status to goals. Goal status: Completed / In Progress / Failed / Failed (Timeout). Failed goal MUST trigger “URGENT RETRY: <Goal>” in corrective_actions. Output JSON: {thoughts: {summary, corrective_actions}, goal_evaluations: {...}} 

J.8 Game Analyst (Post-Game Forensic Analyst) 

Invoked once at game end. Generates the 

game_analysis_report.json for the episode by retrieving and analyzing the action logs from the SQLite database. 

Game Analyst — System Prompt (Condensed) 

You are a Senior Forensic Game Analyst. Perform a rigorous post-mortem to extract high-leverage strategic lessons via Chain-of- Success/Failure traces. Eight-Dimension Analysis: 1. Garrison & Defense: coverage, Wall-Unit synergy, redundant units. 2. Production: mix (Settler/Military/Infrastructure), analysis. 

3. Worker Tile Improvement: road network, irrigation timing, idle workers. 4. Tax Rate: Luxury timing (wasted under Despotism), disorder response. 5. Technology Path: full chronological sequence, gov-prerequisite trace. 6. Government Transition: Despotism penalty quantification, transition pace. 7. Over-Militarization vs. Zero-Growth Economy. 8. Expansion Stagnation: pace, city spacing, missed safe-land settlement. Recommendations must form a coherent Rapid Development Pipeline: City founding -> precise defense (Walls + military unit) -> core infrastructure. Output JSON: GameAnalysisResponse {final_state, success,root_causes, recommendations, ...}