Title: CoupVisor: Strategy Optimization by Round and Challenge Decision Support

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.15868v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:18:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# CoupVisor: Strategy Optimization by Round and Challenge Decision Support 

Cris Huynh 

crishuynh2004@gmail.com 

Abstract —This paper presents CoupVisor, a decision-support system for the hidden-information card game Coup. It addresses two questions: what a player should do on each turn, and when a player should challenge an opponent’s claim. The system is built around a single description of game events, which is shared across manual play, replay of recorded games, simulation, belief tracking, advisor recommendations, and learning-based policies. CoupVisor estimates the chance that a claim is truthful by combining how likely each role is with how many cards the claimant still holds, which corrects a case where the very first claim of a game was flagged as suspicious despite no evidence. We compare a rule-following advisor and several learned and heuristic players across many simulated games and different opponent styles. Our main finding is that the choice of reward, whether it rewards short-term gains or ultimately winning the game, decides which learning approach performs best, and that a win-oriented reward produces a policy that outperforms all baselines. 

Index Terms —Reinforcement learning, POMDP, imperfect in-formation games, Bayesian belief tracking, decision support systems, game theory. 

I. Introduction Coup is a card game in which every player holds two face-down role cards and may claim any role at any time, whether or not the claim is true. Claims are enforced only by challenges: a player who doubts a claim may demand proof, and whoever is wrong about the claim loses a card. Every turn therefore contains two coupled decisions, which action to take and whether to challenge the action someone else has just claimed, and both must be made without seeing any opponent’s hand. Coup is thus a compact instance of a general problem: acting under uncertainty against an adversary who benefits from being misread. A full description of the rules is given in Appendix D. What makes this problem tractable is that the evidence is already public. Every action, block, challenge, and reveal is visible to the whole table, and each one constrains which roles a player can plausibly hold. A player who claims Duke and later claims Assassin has committed to a specific two-card hand. A role whose three copies are all face up cannot be claimed truthfully by anyone. Yet at a real table this record is almost never used. Players challenge on instinct, on table talk, and on a vague sense that someone has claimed too much, and after the game there is no way to say whether a given challenge was justified by the information available at the time. The gap is not a shortage of evidence but the absence of anything that turns the evidence into a number. CoupVisor closes that gap. It is an observer and advisor rather than a game-playing bot: it watches the public record, maintains an explicit probability distribution over every op-ponent’s hidden roles, and converts that distribution into a stated answer to the question a player is actually asking, namely whether this particular claim is worth challenging. The design decision that makes the rest of the system possible is that a single event schema describes the public record, and every component consumes it. Manual turn entry, replay of a recorded game, the synthetic game simulator, the Bayesian belief tracker, the threshold advisor, and the offline-trained policies all read the same events, so a recommendation pro-duced during live play, during replay, and during a training run is produced by identical code. This paper reports what that system does and how well it does it. We describe the belief model and its evidence weights, the challenge rule and the thresholds it applies, and the conversion from a per-card probability to the per-hand probability that a claim actually asserts. We then evaluate the advisor over 500 simulated games spanning five seeds and two opponent conditions, ablate the belief mode and the advisor itself, and benchmark behavior cloning, deep Q-learning, three non-learning heuristics, and a random policy under two different reward definitions. The work pays off in three ways. For a player, an instinct becomes a stated probability with a stated reason, separated cleanly from the hard rule constraints such as the forced Coup at ten coins that no probability can override. For research, the frozen evaluation gives a testbed in which belief modelling, decision rules, and learned policies can each be varied on their own. For decision support more generally, one result transfers beyond the game: under a shaped short-term reward, behavior cloning beats deep Q-learning by a wide margin, while under a reward aligned with actually winning, the same deep Q-learning architecture beats every baseline. Nothing about the network or the data changed between those two runs. Reward alignment, not algorithm choice, decided the outcome. II. Background This section defines the technical terms used throughout the paper so that the later sections can be read without external reference. 

A. Coup and the Public Record 

Coup uses five roles, Duke, Assassin, Captain, Ambassador, and Contessa, with three copies of each in the deck. Each arXiv:2608.15868v1 [cs.AI] 16 Aug 2026 player begins with two hidden role cards, called influence ,and two coins. Losing a challenge or being couped costs one influence, and a player at zero influence is eliminated. Actions carry coin costs and legality constraints: Assassinate requires three coins, Coup requires seven, and a player holding ten or more coins must Coup. A claim is the assertion of a role implied by an action, for example Tax implies Duke, or by a block, for example blocking Assassinate implies Contessa. A 

challenge is a demand that the claim be proven by revealing the card. The sequence of actions, claims, blocks, challenges, and reveals is visible to everyone and forms the public record 

on which CoupVisor operates. 

B. Imperfect Information and the POMDP 

A game is one of imperfect information when a player cannot observe the full state, here the opponents’ hidden cards. The standard formalism is the Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), defined by a set of hidden states, a set of actions, a transition rule, a set of observations, and an observation rule that links hidden states to what is actually seen. Because the true state is unavailable, a POMDP agent acts on a belief state instead. 

C. Belief, Prior, Posterior, and the Bayesian Update 

The belief 𝑏 𝑖 (𝑟 ) is the probability that player 𝑖 holds role 𝑟 

given the public record ℎ𝑡 up to time 𝑡 :

𝑏 𝑖 (𝑟 ) = 𝑃 (𝑟 𝑖 = 𝑟 | ℎ𝑡 ). (1) The prior is the belief before an event is observed; at the start of a game it is uniform, 𝑏 𝑖 (𝑟 ) = 0.20 for five roles. The 

posterior is the belief after the event. The two are linked by 

Bayes’ rule , which in the proportional form used here states that the posterior is the prior multiplied by the likelihood of the observed event under each hypothesis: 

𝑏 𝑖 (𝑟 ) ∝ 𝑃 (event | 𝑟 𝑖 = 𝑟 ) · 𝑏 𝑖 (𝑟 ), (2) followed by normalisation , that is, rescaling so the values sum to one across roles. The likelihood term is implemented as a likelihood ratio ,the ratio of how often a player makes a given claim when they hold the role to how often they make it when they do not. Calibrating against an honest claim rate near 0 .85 and a bluff rate near 0 .15 gives a ratio of about 5 .7, which is applied when a role is claimed through an action or through a Foreign Aid or Assassination block. Steal blocks use 4 .5, because two different roles can block a Steal and the claim therefore discriminates less. Surviving a challenge multiplies the claimed role by 10 .0, since the card was shown, and losing one multiplies it by 0 .05. Scores are additionally scaled by a deck pressure factor (𝑐 𝑟 /3)0.7, where 𝑐 𝑟 is the number of copies of role 𝑟 not yet revealed dead, so that a role whose copies are exhausted becomes unlikely regardless of what is claimed. The exact constants and update code are given in Appendix A. 

D. From Per-Card Belief to Per-Hand Probability 

A belief is a per-card quantity, but a claim is a statement about a hand . If the cards were drawn independently, a player with 𝑘 𝑖 remaining influence would hold at least one copy of role 𝑟 with probability 

𝑝 ind (𝑖, 𝑟 ) = 1 −  1 − 𝑏 𝑖 (𝑟 ) 𝑘 𝑖 . (3) Cards are in fact dealt without replacement from a finite deck, so CoupVisor also computes the hypergeometric probability of holding at least one copy when 𝑘 𝑖 cards are drawn from a 15-card pool containing 𝑐 𝑟 copies: 

𝑝 hyp (𝑖, 𝑟 ) = 1 −

 15 −𝑐 𝑟 

> 𝑘 𝑖

 15 

> 𝑘 𝑖

 . (4) The deployed estimate blends the two, weighting the combina-torial term more heavily and retaining the belief-derived term so that accumulated claim evidence still moves the estimate in low-information games: 

𝑝 truth = 0.7 𝑝 hyp + 0.3 𝑝 ind . (5) 

E. Threshold Rules and Expected Value 

A threshold rule converts a probability into a binary de-cision by comparing it against a cut-off: challenge when 

𝑝 truth < 𝜃 , otherwise do not. The threshold 𝜃 encodes how costly a wrong challenge is relative to a missed one. The same decision can be written as an expected value (EV) comparison. Writing 𝐺 for the gain when a false claim is correctly challenged and 𝐿 for the loss when a true claim is wrongly challenged, a challenge is preferred when 

(1 − 𝑝 truth ) 𝐺 > 𝑝 truth 𝐿, (6) which is a threshold rule with 𝜃 = 𝐺 /( 𝐺 + 𝐿 ). The threshold form is used in the deployed advisor because it is inspectable, while the EV form is the justification for the particular values chosen. 

F. Reinforcement Learning Terms Reinforcement learning (RL) learns a policy 𝜋 (𝑎 | 𝑠 ), a rule mapping states to actions, by maximising the expected return ,the discounted sum of future rewards Í𝑡 𝛾 𝑡 𝑟 𝑡 , where the dis-count factor 𝛾 ∈ [ 0, 1) trades immediate against future reward. The action-value function 𝑄 (𝑠, 𝑎 ) is the expected return from taking action 𝑎 in state 𝑠 and behaving optimally thereafter, and Q-learning estimates it from observed transitions. A Deep Q-Network (DQN) represents 𝑄 with a neural network and stabilises training with an experience replay buffer , which stores past transitions and samples them in random batches, and a periodically synchronised target network .Two contrasts matter here. Behavior cloning (BC) is su-pervised imitation: it learns to predict the action a logged demonstrator took, with no notion of reward. Offline RL is reinforcement learning from a fixed, previously collected set of transitions with no further interaction with the environment, and its characteristic failure is distribution shift , where the learned policy proposes actions the logged data never covered. All learning in this paper is offline, since policies are trained on simulator logs. Finally, reward shaping is the practice of adding intermedi-ate reward terms, here coin gain and influence retained, to a sparse objective in order to give a denser learning signal. We contrast this with a win-aligned reward that credits the policy only when its chosen action matches the action taken by the eventual winner of the logged game. Both reward functions appear verbatim in Appendix B. 

G. Exploration Versus Exploitation 

An exploitative rule always takes the action that looks best under current estimates, whereas an exploratory rule sometimes takes an action whose value is uncertain in order to improve those estimates and to avoid being predictable. In an adversarial game the second concern is decisive: a deter-ministic policy is exploitable , because an opponent can infer it and respond, so strong play requires mixed strategies that ran-domise between truthful actions, bluffs, and challenges. Three mechanisms appear in this paper. 𝜀 -greedy takes a uniformly random action with probability 𝜀 and the highest-valued action otherwise, annealing 𝜀 over training. The Boltzmann (softmax) policy 𝜋 (𝑎 | 𝑠 ) = softmax  𝑄 (𝑠, 𝑎 )/ 𝜏  spreads probability in proportion to estimated value, with a temperature 𝜏 controlling how sharp the distribution is. Thompson sampling draws a hypothesis from a posterior distribution and acts as though it were true, so exploration is allocated in proportion to genuine uncertainty rather than by a fixed schedule. Entropy ,measured in nats, quantifies how spread out the resulting action distribution is and is used below as a direct measurement of exploration. 

H. Evaluation Terms 

For the challenge decision, which is binary, precision is the fraction of recommended challenges that were correct, recall 

is the fraction of false claims that were challenged, and F1 

is their harmonic mean. Outcome accuracy is the fraction of decision points at which the recommendation matched the better outcome in hindsight. Calibration asks whether a stated probability matches observed frequency, so that a claim assigned 0 .7 should be true about seventy percent of the time. It is the property most directly implicated by our error analysis. A confidence interval (CI) gives the range in which a mean plausibly lies, and a difference whose 95% CI crosses zero is not claimed as reliable. III. Related Work The techniques used here rest on existing work in hidden-information decision making, imitation learning, and rein-forcement learning. Maintaining role probabilities as a belief state follows the partial-observability framing of the POMDP literature [1]. The transition dataset is built as Markov-style state, action, next-state tuples, and the RL objective follows action-value learning [2]. Policy learning from logged be-havior follows imitation-learning formulations [4], [5], with a Random Forest classifier [3] used for the supervised variant. The value-based baseline is DQN [6] with experience replay [7], and because training uses fixed logged transitions without online interaction, the setting is offline RL [8]. Evaluation uses precision, recall, F1, and confusion-matrix statistics [11], ROC-AUC for binary tasks [9], and calibration-bin analysis for predicted probabilities [10]. IV. Framework and Methodology 

A. Overall Framework 

CoupVisor is organised as a single event pipeline, shown in Fig. 1. The same pipeline serves manual entry, recorded-game replay, and the simulator, which is what allows training data and live advice to remain consistent. 

B. Round Strategy Optimization Loop 

The per-round loop, shown in Fig. 2, is what produces action advice as opposed to challenge advice. It is re-entered from scratch every round rather than carrying a plan forward, because a single challenge can invalidate any multi-turn inten-tion. 

C. Challenge Decision Logic 

When a player makes a role claim, the advisor computes 

𝑝 truth from (5), compares it against a context-dependent thresh-old, and outputs either Challenge or Do not challenge (Fig. 3). Thresholds differ by claim context because the cost of being wrong differs. A Steal block uses a base of 0 .20, an Assassinate action or an assassination block uses 0 .35, a claim whose role has no copies left in the deck uses 0 .99, and all other claims use 0 .25. The base is then adjusted by the user’s risk mode and by the state of the table. Fewer surviving players raises the threshold, by 0 .10 at two players and 0 .05 at three, since with fewer opponents an unchallenged bluff is more damaging. Holding a single influence lowers it by 0 .08, since the challenger cannot afford to be wrong. Any opponent sitting at seven or more coins raises it by 0 .06, since that opponent can Coup next turn and the challenger is under time pressure. The result is clamped to [0.01 , 0.99 ]. The complete threshold function is reproduced in Appendix A. The per-hand conversion is necessary rather than cosmetic. Without it, the uniform turn-one per-card prior of 0 .20 sits below the Tax threshold of 0 .25 and produces a spurious 

Challenge recommendation before any evidence exists. Under (3) alone the value would be 1 − ( 1 − 0.20 )2 ≈ 0.36, and under the deployed blend (5) it is higher still, so the opening claim correctly clears the threshold. 

D. Belief Update Logic 

Belief updates apply the likelihood ratios and deck-pressure scaling defined in Background, then normalise, then apply reveal constraints (Fig. 4). The two supported reveal modes differ in how strictly they treat a revealed card, and the ablation in Section VI-C measures whether that difference matters. Fig. 1. The CoupVisor pipeline. Public events enter from any of three sources, manual turn entry, replay of a recorded game, or the synthetic simulator, and are applied by the engine, which maintains the public state: coins, remaining influence, revealed roles, the current claim, and the last public action. The belief tracker then updates the hidden-role distribution for every player, and the advisor combines public state and belief into a player-facing recommendation. Because all three input sources produce the same event schema, the advice path is identical in live play, in replay, and during policy training.  

> Fig. 2. Round-by-round strategy optimization loop. Each round begins by estimating hidden roles from the current belief state, then enumerates the actions that are legal given the player’s coins and influence, scores each candidate by expected utility against the risk that it is blocked or challenged, and returns a ranked suggestion. The legality filter runs before scoring, so constraints such as the forced Coup at ten coins remove options rather than merely penalising them.

E. Coin Pressure and Legal Action Constraints 

Coins are not only a score variable, since they determine which actions are legal and which threats are real. Each player starts with two coins, Assassinate requires at least three, Coup requires at least seven, and a player holding ten or more coins is compelled to Coup. The forced-Coup rule matters for both realism and advisor behavior: once a player crosses ten coins the action space collapses to a single legal action, so the uncertainty about their next move disappears and a guaranteed attack enters the game. These constraints are enforced identically in the simulator, in event validation, and in the interface event builder, which keeps generated data, replayed data, and manually labelled data consistent. 

F. Advisor Reasoning Under Bluff Pressure 

Because Coup is a bluffing game, the advisor combines probabilistic and rule-based evidence. The probabilistic part is the hidden-role estimate 𝑝 truth for the claiming player, adjusted by the claim context and by the number of copies of the claimed role still unaccounted for. The rule-based part is a set of hard legality checks derived from coins and influence. Both are shown to the user together, so the interface separates what is uncertain from what is certain: belief expresses how likely the claim is, while regulation expresses what is outright impossible. This separation is what makes the recommendation auditable in a high-pressure decision. The advisor exposes three user-facing risk modes. Conserva-tive shifts the threshold down by 0 .05 and preserves influence by challenging less often, Aggressive shifts it up by 0 .07 and punishes likely bluffs more readily, and Balanced is the unshifted default. All three share the same belief model and the same legality constraints. In symmetric early-game states the belief values for several players are close to uniform, which reflects genuinely insufficient information rather than model failure. In those states the system reports the uncertainty ex-plicitly and offers conditional guidance, namely top warnings, ranked candidate actions, and if-then paths, rather than a single deterministic instruction. Action advice is scored by a two-ply expected-value tree. For each legal action the tree evaluates the immediate coin and influence swing, then the opponent responses that the current belief makes likely, such as a Duke block against Foreign Aid or a Contessa block against Assassinate, and finally the challenge that could follow that response. Two plies are enough to capture the block-and-challenge structure that decides most Coup turns without committing to a full game-tree search over hidden states. Fig. 3. Challenge decision logic. On observing a claim the advisor reads 𝑝 truth from the belief model, checks how many copies of the claimed role remain unaccounted for, and applies the threshold rule. The two branches lead to Challenge and Do not challenge , each of which is turned into a human-readable advice sentence carrying the probability and the threshold that produced it, so the recommendation can be audited rather than merely obeyed. 

G. Risk-Asymmetric Behavior in the Endgame 

Decision behavior becomes risk-asymmetric when a player has only one influence left, because the cost of failure is already near its maximum. Such players bluff and challenge more often than expected value alone would justify. For example, a player facing an Assassinate with one influence and no Contessa may still claim Contessa to block. The bluff is unlikely to survive a challenge, but the alternative is certain elimination, so a low success probability is preferred to Fig. 4. Hidden-role belief update pipeline. An incoming event multiplies the score of the role it implicates by the corresponding likelihood ratio, all scores are then damped by deck pressure and normalised to a distribution, and finally reveal constraints are applied. The two modes diverge only at the last step: in 

Standard mode duplicate roles in one hand are permitted, so a revealed role can still carry non-zero hidden probability, whereas in Strict no-duplicate-hand 

mode a player down to a single hidden influence has the revealed role forced to zero and the remainder renormalised. 

none. Modelling this effect improves the realism of simulated opponents and better matches observed human play. A related pattern is deliberate loss for informational gain. Suppose Player A holds Assassin and believes Player B holds Contessa. A may assassinate and then challenge B’s Contessa block. If A loses the challenge, A loses one influence but survives, while B must reveal and redraw, and after the redraw B may no longer hold Contessa. A has accepted a short-term loss to alter the opponent’s role distribution, raising the success probability of the next assassination. This is belief manipulation rather than immediate value maximisation, and it is not captured by a single-step decision rule. 

H. Thompson Sampling Extension 

Thompson sampling offers a principled alternative to both 

𝜀 -greedy exploration and fixed thresholds, and it unifies ex-ploration across the belief and action layers by drawing from posteriors rather than following schedules. At the belief layer, instead of acting on posterior means, the system would sample a latent role assignment for each opponent from the current belief and evaluate candidate actions under that sampled world, so that repeated sampling naturally balances optimistic and conservative readings of the same uncertainty. At the challenge layer, it would maintain context-specific Beta posteriors over claim truthfulness, sample 𝜃 ∼ Beta (𝛼, 𝛽 ) at decision time, challenge when (1 − 𝜃 )𝐺 > 𝜃𝐿 , and update (𝛼, 𝛽 ) from the reveal outcome, giving adaptive behavior without global thresholds. At the action layer, it would keep uncertain value estimates per legal action, sample one value per action per turn, and select the highest sampled value subject to hard rules such as forced Coup. The three exploration mechanisms differ in how exploration is allocated. 𝜀 -greedy explores uniformly at random, the Boltz-mann policy explores in proportion to the spread of estimated action values, and Thompson sampling explores in proportion to posterior uncertainty over latent quantities. The last is the most informed, at the cost of maintaining explicit posteriors. 

I. Decision Layers and Their Current Character 

CoupVisor makes decisions at three layers. The belief layer produces a single normalised posterior per player and performs no sampling, in the spirit of maximum a posteriori reasoning. The advisor layer applies thresholds and is therefore exploita-tive: it maximises immediate expected value under the current belief and returns the same recommendation whenever the belief and the table state are the same. Only the learning layer explores, and it does so through either 𝜀 -greedy or Boltzmann action selection during offline DQN training. 

J. Relation to Poker-Style Imperfect Information 

Coup and poker share hidden information, bluff risk, and the need for mixed strategies, and in both a strong agent must combine probability estimates with action constraints. The difference is that Coup makes role claims and challenges explicit and frequent, so challenge recommendation is a first-class decision in essentially every round rather than an implicit consequence of betting. Coup’s coin constraints, particularly forced Coup at ten coins, also create hard legal transitions stronger than typical poker betting constraints. 

K. Single-Turn Interaction 

Fig. 5 shows how a single turn expands into the branches that the event schema has to represent, and it is the unit that both the replay engine and the simulator operate on. 

L. Worked Example 

A concrete four-player example illustrates how information accumulates. At the start, Players A through D each hold two influence and two coins, nothing has been revealed, and the belief state is uniform at 0 .20 per role (Table I, Step 0). Player A then claims Duke and takes Tax, moving to five coins. The claim raises 𝑃 𝐴 (Duke ) and slightly depresses Duke for everyone else, since one of the three copies is now plausibly accounted for (Step 1). At this point the advisor evaluates the claim. It observes that no Duke has been revealed, that A has shown no prior inconsistency, and that A holds two influence. It computes 𝑝 truth from (5) and compares expected outcomes through (6), weighing the card an opponent loses if the challenge succeeds against the card the challenger loses if it fails. Suppose no one challenges. A gains three coins, which reinforces but does not confirm the Duke hypothesis. Later, A claims Assassin and targets B. Belief shifts toward Assassin for A (Step 2), but the two claims are only jointly satisfiable if A holds exactly Duke and Assassin, so the posterior mass on each individual claim being truthful falls relative to a single-claim history. The advisor recomputes 𝑝 truth 

under the new deck composition and the accumulated claim history, and issues a recommendation for whether B should challenge or block. Table II summarises the sequence. 

M. Training and Evaluation Pipeline 

Simulator output is converted into transition datasets used to train the BC and DQN policies, which are then benchmarked against a random policy and against the non-learning agents described below (Fig. 6). 

N. Non-Learning Baseline Agents 

Random action selection is too weak to be informative on its own, so three non-learning agents of increasing decision qual-ity are used as reference points. The rule-based legal-priority agent enforces legality first, including forced Coup at ten coins, then follows a fixed preference order of Coup, Assassinate, Steal, Tax, Foreign Aid, and finally Income or Exchange. Its challenge decisions use hand-crafted thresholds keyed to claim context and remaining deck copies. The belief-based expected-value agent shares the advisor’s belief estimator but has no trainable parameters. For each legal action it computes a one-step expected value from coin swing, influence swing, and the block or challenge response probabilities implied by current beliefs, and it challenges according to (6). The public-state pressure agent ignores hidden-role beliefs entirely and uses only public features, namely coin pressure, influence counts, and an opponent threat ranking. It targets high-coin opponents and challenges mainly in high-impact contexts such as lethal Assassinate blocks or exhausted role copies. Together these span belief-free, belief-driven, and purely procedural decision making. 

O. User Interaction Flow 

Fig. 7 shows the user-facing path, which is deliberately shallow so that a non-technical user never has to interact with the event schema directly. Fig. 5. Single-turn sequence. The turn opens with an action and its implied role claim, after which the table may block, challenge the action, or challenge the block. Each branch produces its own events, and a challenge resolves before the action or counteraction it targets. Every arrow that carries a claim or a reveal triggers a belief update and a fresh advisor recommendation, which is why a single turn can generate several decision points rather than one. TABLE I Belief evolution over the worked example. Step 0 is the uniform prior, Step 1 follows A’s Duke claim, Step 2 follows A’s Assassin claim. Step Player 𝑃 (Duke ) 𝑃 (Assassin ) 𝑃 (Captain ) 𝑃 (Ambassador ) 𝑃 (Contessa )

0 A 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0 B, C, D 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 1 A 0.55 0.15 0.10 0.10 0.10 1 B, C, D 0.15 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.25 2 A 0.30 0.40 0.10 0.10 0.10 2 B 0.15 0.15 0.20 0.20 0.30 2 C, D 0.15 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.25 TABLE II Event sequence and corresponding advisor update. Step Event Advisor update 1 A claims Duke (Tax) Increase 𝑃 𝐴 (Duke )

2 No challenge Belief remains uncertain 3 A claims Assassin Reduce joint-claim consis-tency 4 Decision point Compute 𝑝 truth , compare EV 

P. Reproduction 

The components that produce every number reported here are given verbatim in the appendices: the belief update and threshold rule in Appendix A, the two reward definitions in Appendix B, and the network, optimiser, and training loop in Appendix C. V. Experimental Setup 

A. Evaluation Run 

All numbers and plots in this paper come from a single evaluation run whose configuration, seeds, and outputs were fixed before analysis, so that every table, ablation, and figure describes the same set of games. 

B. Primary Design Matrix 

The main experiment uses a balanced matrix so that condi-tions are directly comparable. Each of five seeds contributes Fig. 6. Training and evaluation pipeline. Simulated games are flattened into state, action, reward, next-state transitions, which feed both the behavior cloning head and the offline DQN. Both learned policies and the non-learning baselines are then replayed through the same evaluation harness on the same transitions, so that reward per episode, reward per step, and action-match rate are computed identically for every policy.                  

> Fig. 7. User interaction flow. The user loads or enters a game, steps through it event by event, and at each step sees the reconstructed public state, the hidden-role belief table, and the advisor recommendation for any claim currently on the table. Advice and validation warnings are presented side by side, so that a probabilistic judgement is never confused with a hard rule violation. TABLE III Primary balanced matrix (seed ×condition). Seed Aggressive-heavy Honest-heavy 101 50 games 50 games 202 50 games 50 games 303 50 games 50 games 404 50 games 50 games 505 50 games 50 games Total 250 games 250 games

the same number of games to each opponent condition (Ta-ble III), for 250 games per condition and 500 games in total. 

C. Metrics 

Advisor quality is measured by challenge precision, chal-lenge recall, challenge F1, outcome accuracy, and outcome score. Policy quality is measured by average reward per episode, average reward per step, and action-match rate against the logged reference action. 

D. Exploration-Mode Ablation 

For the DQN training protocol we additionally ablate the action-selection rule. Two conditions are compared under identical seeds, network architecture, replay buffer, and reward function: 𝜀 -greedy with 𝜀 start = 1.0, 𝜀 end = 0.05, and multi-plicative decay 0 .995 per episode, and a Boltzmann softmax policy with 𝜏 start = 1.0, 𝜏 end = 0.1, and the same decay. For each condition we record the running average episode reward, the mean per-step entropy of the action distribution in nats, and the action-visitation histogram. The entropy curve measures the realised exploration schedule, which a scalar 𝜀 or 𝜏 value alone does not capture. 

E. Evaluation Beyond Random Comparison 

Random-policy comparison is retained as a weak lower bound, but the primary evaluation uses three stronger pro-tocols. Scenario-based evaluation runs all policies on fixed decision scenarios that isolate the core Coup conflicts, namely early Tax claims, Steal-block-challenge branches, Assassinate-Contessa branches, forced-Coup states, and one-influence endgames, under shared seeds, which removes rollout vari-ance and permits decision-level comparison. Opponent-type robustness runs cross-play against honest-heavy, bluff-heavy, aggressive-heavy, cautious-heavy, and mixed opponent pools, reported as a matrix over train and test opponent types to expose behavioral shift. Decision-quality metrics supplement reward with challenge precision, recall, and F1, calibration TABLE IV Advisor metrics across seed-condition cells. Metric Mean Std CI low CI high Challenge F1 0.4236 0.1409 0.3363 0.5110 Outcome accuracy 0.5694 0.0242 0.5544 0.5844 Outcome score 0.1428 0.0486 0.1127 0.1730 TABLE V Condition comparison by bot mix (mean across seeds). Condition Challenge F1 Outcome acc. Outcome score Aggressive-heavy 0.5641 0.5619 0.1239 Honest-heavy 0.2831 0.5769 0.1617 TABLE VI Weighted ranking score by condition. Condition Weighted score Aggressive-heavy 0.5628 Honest-heavy 0.4594 

quality such as Brier score, legality rate, forced-Coup com-pliance, and one-step regret against a belief-based oracle ap-proximation, so that strategic soundness is assessed separately from final reward. VI. Results 

A. Advisor Multi-Seed Results 

Table IV reports advisor metrics aggregated over the ten seed-condition cells. Challenge F1 has a wide interval, 0 .336 to 0 .511, while outcome accuracy is comparatively stable at 0 .5694 ± 0.0242. The contrast matters: the outcome-level behavior of the advisor is stable across seeds, but its challenge decisions are not, and the variance is driven by opponent composition rather than by seed noise, as the next subsection shows. 

B. Bot-Mix Sensitivity 

Table V separates the two opponent conditions. Challenge F1 is almost twice as high against aggressive-heavy opponents (0 .5641) as against honest-heavy opponents (0 .2831), which is the expected direction: when few claims are false, recall has little to find and precision is punished by every challenge. Outcome accuracy moves in the opposite direction but only slightly, from 0 .5619 to 0 .5769. Table VI gives the weighted ranking score, 0 .5628 against aggressive-heavy and 0 .4594 against honest-heavy. 

C. Ablation: Belief Mode 

Table VII compares Standard against Strict no-duplicate-hand belief updating. All three deltas are small and negative, and all three 95% confidence intervals cross zero, so no reliable difference is claimed. The practical reading is that the duplicate-hand constraint rarely binds at the decision points that matter, because by the time a player is down to one                                              

> TABLE VII Standard vs strict no-duplicate-hand belief mode. Mode Challenge F1 Outcome acc. Outcome score Standard 0.4236 0.5694 0.1428 Strict no-duplicate 0.4190 0.5684 0.1408
> Δ(Strict −Std.) −0.0046 −0.0010 −0.0020 TABLE VIII Advisor policy ablation (off = never-challenge baseline). Mode Challenge F1 Outcome acc. Outcome score Advisor on 0.4236 0.5694 0.1428 Advisor off 0.0000 0.8192 0.6424
> Δ(Off −On) −0.4236 +0.2498 +0.4996 TABLE IX Policy benchmark under the original shaped reward ( Δcoins +Δalive
> +action-match). Policy Reward/episode Reward/step Action match DQN −0.2868 −0.0179 0.1905 Random −0.6004 −0.0375 0.1415 Behavior cloning 1.0412 0.0651 0.3980

hidden influence the belief is usually already dominated by other evidence. 

D. Ablation: Advisor On Versus Off 

Table VIII compares the advisor against a never-challenge baseline. The confidence intervals are far from zero on all three metrics, but the direction requires care. Turning the advisor off drives challenge F1 to zero by construction, yet raises outcome accuracy to 0 .8192 and outcome score to 0 .6424. This is not evidence that challenging is harmful. It is evidence that in this simulator most claims are true, so a policy that never challenges is rarely punished. The comparison establishes the cost side of challenging, not its overall value, and it should not be read as a full strategic baseline. 

E. Significance Notes 

Every Strict-minus-Standard interval crosses zero, so that difference is not claimed. Every advisor-on-minus-off interval excludes zero, so those differences are real in the statistical sense, subject to the interpretive caveat above. 

F. Policy Benchmark 

Table IX reports the benchmark under the original shaped reward, which sums coin change, influence change, and an action-match bonus. Behavior cloning reaches +1.04 average reward per episode against −0.29 for DQN and −0.60 for random. The DQN reward curve in Fig. 10 oscillates between roughly −6 and +4 per episode with a rolling mean band of 

[− 3, +0.5] and no upward trend across 100 episodes. Three factors explain the plateau. The training budget is short. The per-step shaping mixes coin change, influence change, and a +1 action-match bonus, so variance from TABLE X Policy benchmark under win-aligned reward ( +1 when the chosen action matches the winner’s logged action). 100 games; 1000 training episodes for DQN. Policy Reward/episode Reward/step Winner match DQN (win-reward) 6.74 0.248 0.373                                             

> Belief-EV heuristic 3.68 0.135 0.263 Behavior cloning 3.38 0.124 0.330 Honest (baseline) 2.84 0.104 0.244 Rule-based heuristic 2.42 0.089 0.264 Pressure heuristic 2.30 0.085 0.245 Random 1.32 0.049 0.141 TABLE XI DQN training summary under the win-aligned reward. Episodes Avg ep. reward Avg ep. steps Final 𝜀
> 10 12.700 22.60 0.95111 50 14.580 24.46 0.77213 100 14.840 24.46 0.60577 200 15.045 24.46 0.36695 500 16.278 24.46 0.08157 1000 17.793 24.46 0.00500 5000 22.901 24.46 ≤0.005

logged-bot randomness dominates any long-horizon signal. The offline environment replays transitions from heteroge-neous bot styles rather than from winning trajectories only. Since the downstream goal is to win the game rather than to accumulate coins, we retrained DQN with a win-aligned reward that grants +1 only when the chosen action matches the action taken by the eventual winner, and extended training to 1000 episodes. Table X reports the revised benchmark, which also adds an 

Honest baseline that takes Tax when poor, Assassinate when able, and Coup when rich. The ordering inverts completely. DQN now leads at 6 .74 reward per episode and 0 .373 winner-action match, ahead of the belief-EV heuristic (3 .68), behavior cloning (3 .38), and the remaining heuristics, with random at 1.32. The corresponding reward curve, Fig. 11, rises from a rolling mean near 1 .5 at episode 20 to roughly 5 .9 by episode 1000. Table XI shows the same trend in the training summary, where average episode reward grows monotonically from 12 .7 at 10 episodes to 22 .9 at 5000 while episode length stays fixed at 24 .46 steps. Learned policies therefore improve over random under both rewards, but which learned policy is stronger is decided by the reward definition, not by the algorithm. 

G. Result Figures 

Figures 8 through 12 present the same results graphically. 

H. Exploration-Mode Comparison 

Fig. 13 contrasts the two exploration modes and shows that matching the scalar schedules does not match the exploration actually performed. VII. Discussion 

A. What the Results Say 

The advisor produces usable recommendations but is im-balanced between precision and recall, and the imbalance is systematic rather than random: it is a calibration problem, not a modelling failure. Opponent composition changes advisor performance substantially, which means any single reported F1 is only meaningful alongside the opponent mix it was measured against. Learned policies beat random under both reward definitions, but the ranking among them inverts when the reward changes. Coin pressure creates a sharp structural break in the game, since past ten coins the forced Coup collapses next-action uncertainty to zero. One design property deserves explicit statement. The de-ployed advisor is a deterministic threshold rule and therefore sits at the exploitation end of the spectrum. This was chosen for interpretability, and it is in tension with the mixed-strategy requirement of imperfect-information games, which predicts that any deterministic rule is exploitable in the limit. The exploration-mode ablation and the Thompson-sampling extension both point to the same remedy, namely a stochas-tic advisor whose mixing probabilities come from posterior uncertainty rather than from hand-chosen constants. 

B. How This Research Helps 

The clearest practical contribution is to the player. A chal-lenge decision is normally made from intuition under time pressure, and the intuition is difficult to inspect afterwards. CoupVisor replaces it with a stated probability, the evidence that produced it, and a separate statement of what the rules make impossible. That separation, uncertain belief on one side and hard legality on the other, is what makes the advice teachable. A learner can see that a recommendation not to challenge came from a per-hand probability rather than a per-card one, and can see when the recommendation was driven purely by deck exhaustion. The three risk modes let the same evidence be read under different tolerances, which is closer to how humans actually differ than a single optimal answer would be. The second contribution is methodological, and it is the finding we consider most transferable. Under a shaped short-term reward, behavior cloning beat DQN by a wide margin. Under a reward aligned with winning, the same DQN architec-ture beat every baseline including behavior cloning. Nothing about the network, the buffer, or the data changed. The lesson generalises to any offline decision-support system trained from logged behavior: when the logged population is heterogeneous in quality, shaping toward local proxies teaches the model to imitate the average participant, whereas conditioning the reward on the outcome you actually care about teaches it to imitate the successful ones. Practitioners who observe a flat, non-improving offline RL curve should audit the reward definition before concluding that the algorithm or the data is inadequate. The third contribution is architectural. Building every com-ponent on one event schema, covering manual entry, replay, Fig. 8. Advisor metrics across the ten seed-condition cells. Each metric is plotted with its spread over cells, which makes visible the contrast reported in Table IV: outcome accuracy sits in a narrow band while challenge F1 varies widely, so the instability is confined to the challenge decision rather than affecting the advisor as a whole.  

> Fig. 9. Advisor performance split by opponent condition. The aggressive-heavy and honest-heavy pools are shown side by side for each metric. Challenge F1 separates sharply between the two while outcome accuracy barely moves, identifying opponent composition as the source of the F1 variance in Fig. 8.

simulation, belief tracking, advice, and training, means achange to the decision rule propagates to live advice, replay, and training simultaneously, with no risk that the deployed rule and the evaluated rule drift apart. This is the property that most decision-support systems lose first, and the Coup setting is small enough to demonstrate it end to end. The fourth contribution is the structure of the problem itself. The challenge decision, in which one pays a cost to verify a claim that may be false and is punished for being wrong in either direction, has the same structure as an inspection or audit decision. Deciding whether to audit a filing, verify a self-reported metric, escalate a flagged transaction, or request proof in a negotiation all share the form of (6): a posterior over truthfulness, an asymmetric cost, and a threshold that has to be set deliberately. Coup provides a fully observable, cheaply simulated instance of that structure in which belief updating Fig. 10. DQN reward curve under the original shaped reward, 100 episodes. Per-episode reward oscillates between roughly −6 and +4, and the rolling mean stays inside [− 3, +0.5] with no upward trend, so the policy is not learning. This flat curve is what motivated changing the reward rather than the algorithm. Corresponds to Table IX. 

> Fig. 11. DQN reward curve under the win-aligned reward, 1000 episodes. The rolling mean rises from about 1 .5 at episode 20 to about 5 .9 by episode 1000, a steady climb rather than the flat band of Fig. 10, confirming that the same architecture does learn once the reward credits winner-matching actions. Corresponds to Table X.

and threshold setting can be varied and measured indepen-dently, which is difficult in the real settings it resembles. Finally, the error analysis below converts these results into specific engineering actions rather than general advice, and because the evaluation set is fixed, each of those actions can be assessed against exactly the same 500 games. 

C. Error Analysis 

We inspected all 2,670 challenged claims in the evaluation run. Two failure groups dominate. In 942 cases (35 .3%) the advisor recommended Challenge but the claim was true, and in 96 cases (3 .6%) it recommended Do not challenge but the claim was false. The asymmetry is the numeric form of the precision-recall imbalance noted above: the system challenges far too eagerly. By action type, false challenges concentrate on Steal (467 of 942) and Tax (299 of 942), while missed challenges are mostly Steal (62 of 96). Table XII gives representative cases. Cases E2 and E3 sit within 0 .0003 of their threshold, so a small margin band around equality would recover them. Cases E1 and E4 show posteriors collapsing to 10 −34 , which no correct belief should produce from the available evidence, and which indicates that repeated multiplicative updates compound without bound. Capping or re-calibrating repeated-claim evi-dence is the direct fix. Case E5 is a different failure entirely, since the policy violates a hard rule, which argues for explicit penalty shaping on non-Coup choices in 10+ coin states rather than for better probability estimates. Fig. 12. Policy benchmark summary. Every policy is scored on the same transitions, so the bars are directly comparable. Under the shaped reward the learned and heuristic policies cluster near or below zero while behavior cloning leads, the ordering that the win-aligned rerun in Table X subsequently inverts. 

Fig. 13. Exploration-mode ablation under identical seeds, architecture, buffer, and reward. Left: running average episode reward. Middle: mean per-step entropy of the action distribution in nats. Right: action-visitation histogram. The 𝜀 -greedy entropy curve is monotone in 𝜀 and so is fixed entirely by the schedule, whereas the Boltzmann entropy curve also responds to the spread of learned action values and can plateau above the schedule floor when several actions have comparable value. The two mechanisms therefore allocate exploration differently even when their scalar schedules agree, which is why entropy rather than the schedule parameter is the quantity worth reporting. 

VIII. Challenges and Limitations Coup is partially observable, so many states remain weakly identifiable from public actions alone. In early and symmetric phases belief values stay close across players, which limits confidence in any single-step recommendation, and this is a property of the game rather than only of the implementation. The core interactions are also multi-stage, running from action to block to challenge to reveal, and keeping those branches consistent across replay, simulation, and interface introduces engineering complexity and annotation noise, where a small event-ordering error can propagate into both belief and advice. The learning results carry the standard offline constraints. BC and DQN are trained from logged simulator trajectories, so they are exposed to distribution shift and extrapolation error on TABLE XII Representative failure cases from the evaluation run.                                      

> Case Evidence System output Ground truth and issue E1 game 339, event 48 (Tax, Duke by P2)
> Challenge ;𝑝 truth =1.93e −34, thr. 0.25 Challenge result is a win for the claimant, so the claim was true. Overconfident false positive. E2 game 231, event 1(Steal block, Ambassador by P2)
> Do not challenge ;𝑝 truth =0.20, thr. 0.20 Claimant loses, so the claim was false. Borderline equal-ity missed a profitable challenge. E3 game 158, event 7(Steal, Captain by P3)
> Do not challenge ;𝑝 truth =0.2503, thr. 0 .25 Claimant loses, so the claim was false. Near-threshold miss. E4 game 417, event 49 (Foreign Aid block, Duke by P4)
> Challenge ;𝑝 truth =8.98e −34, thr. 0.35 Claim was true. Block-claim handling is calibration-sensitive. E5 DQN trace, game 106, step 12 DQN chose Exchange holding 11 coins Legal action is Coup . In 10+ coin states DQN chose non-Coup 151 of 181 times, so forced-Coup alignment is weak.

states the logs never covered, and policy quality can degrade precisely in the rare, high-impact situations that decide games. The opponents themselves are scripted styles, namely honest, bluffer, aggressive, and cautious, which give controlled exper-iments but do not capture adaptive human deception, long-horizon signalling, or meta-game adjustment across repeated matches. The simulator also omits one real rule: a proven card is not swapped back into the deck after a successful challenge defense, which slightly biases downstream belief statistics. The reported benchmark was produced under an earlier parameterisation of the belief multipliers and the threshold rule than the one documented in Section VI-A and Appendix A, so a re-run under the current configuration is outstanding. The direction of the dominant error mode, over-eager challenging, is unlikely to reverse, since the current likelihood ratios are larger and therefore concentrate belief faster, but the magni-tudes should be expected to move. The decision rule is myopic. Thresholded posterior estimates with context adjustments are transparent, but they do not opti-mise long-term game value, so retaliation risk, the signalling value of information, and endgame tempo are unmodelled. Finally, evaluation is simulation-based and reproducible but externally unvalidated, since there is no human-in-the-loop study, no cross-implementation comparison, and no stratifi-cation across player counts or table dynamics. IX. Conclusion CoupVisor is a reproducible Coup research pipeline built on a single event schema and focused on two coupled decisions: what to do each round, and when to challenge. It converts public evidence into an explicit per-hand probability and a threshold decision, and the per-hand conversion removes a systematic false challenge on the opening claim. Across 500 simulated games the advisor is stable in outcome accuracy but sensitive to opponent mix in challenge F1, and its errors are dominated by over-eager challenges traceable to uncontrolled multiplicative belief updates. On the learning side, both BC and DQN beat random, but which one leads is determined by the reward definition rather than by the algorithm: shaped short-term reward favours BC, while a win-aligned reward makes DQN the strongest policy in the benchmark. The rule layer, including forced Coup at ten coins, keeps regulation, advice, replay, and simulation consistent throughout. X. Future Work The most immediate work is belief calibration: post-hoc calibration such as isotonic or temperature scaling, reliability diagrams, and confidence-aware advisor output that states uncertainty bands instead of a bare decision. This directly targets the dominant error mode identified above. Next is a Thompson-sampling advisor that replaces fixed thresholds with context-specific posteriors for both challenge and action selection, benchmarked against the Conservative, Balanced, and Aggressive modes, together with a companion posterior-sampling belief query that scores candidate actions under sampled full role assignments rather than always conditioning on the posterior mean, which places exploration at the layer where hidden-role uncertainty actually lives. On the evaluation side, a standardised scenario suite cov-ering Tax conflicts, Steal block trees, Assassinate-Contessa branches, forced-Coup states, and one-influence endgames would allow deterministic policy-level comparison indepen-dent of rollout variance. On the training side, extending from purely offline training to constrained self-play fine-tuning, while preserving legality-rate and forced-Coup compliance checks during training, would address the distribution-shift limitation, and replacing the mean-squared Bellman loss with a soft Bellman target carrying an entropy bonus would couple the exploration schedule to the learning signal rather than ap-plying it only at action-selection time. Learning opponent-type embeddings would let advisor behavior adapt to table style instead of relying on static global thresholds. Finally, human-centred evaluation through user studies on explanation quality, decision trust, and the actionability of top-𝑘 conditional paths for novice and experienced players is required before any claim about practical usefulness can be considered established. References     

> [1] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 101, no. 1–2, pp. 99–134, 1998. [2] C. J. C. H. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine Learning ,vol. 8, no. 3–4, pp. 279–292, 1992.

[3] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5– 32, 2001. [4] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , PMLR 15, pp. 627–635, 2011. [5] T. Osa, J. Pajarinen, G. Neumann, J. A. Bagnell, P. Abbeel, and J. Peters, “An algorithmic perspective on imitation learning,” Foundations and Trends in Robotics , vol. 7, no. 1–2, pp. 1–179, 2018. [6] V. Mnih et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learn-ing,” Nature , vol. 518, pp. 529–533, 2015. [7] L.-J. Lin, “Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learn-ing, planning and teaching,” Machine Learning , vol. 8, pp. 293–321, 1992. [8] S. Levine, A. Kumar, G. Tucker, and J. Fu, “Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643 , 2020. [9] T. Fawcett, “An introduction to ROC analysis,” Pattern Recognition Letters , vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 861–874, 2006. [10] A. Niculescu-Mizil and R. Caruana, “Predicting good probabilities with supervised learning,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML) , pp. 625–632, 2005. [11] M. Sokolova and G. Lapalme, “A systematic analysis of performance measures for classification tasks,” Information Processing & Manage-ment , vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 427–437, 2009. Appendix A Belief Update and Challenge Rule This appendix gives the code behind every belief and threshold constant quoted in the paper. 

A.1 Likelihood ratios 

The ratio is the probability of making a claim given that the player holds the role, divided by the probability of making it given that they do not. An honest claim rate near 0 .85 against a bluff rate near 0 .15 yields 5 .67. Steal blocks are lower because either of two roles can block a Steal. 

ACTION_LIKELIHOOD_RATIOS = {"Tax": ("Duke", 5.7), "Assassinate": ("Assassin", 5.7), "Steal": ("Captain", 5.7), "Exchange": ("Ambassador", 5.7), }BLOCK_LIKELIHOOD_RATIOS = {"Foreign Aid": [("Duke", 5.7)], "Assassination": [("Contessa", 5.7)], "Steal": [("Captain", 4.5), ("Ambassador", 4.5)], }CHALLENGE_WIN_RATIO = 10.0 CHALLENGE_LOSE_RATIO = 0.05 

A.2 Applying evidence 

Each event type multiplies the score of the role it implicates. A won challenge is near-certain confirmation, a lost challenge near-certain disconfirmation. 

def _apply_action_multiplier(belief, event): if event.actor not in belief.scores: return entry = ACTION_LIKELIHOOD_RATIOS.get(event.action_name) if entry is None: return role_name, ratio = entry role = Role(role_name) belief.scores[event.actor][role] *= float(ratio) def _apply_block_multiplier(belief, event): if event.blocker not in belief.scores: return for role_name, ratio in BLOCK_LIKELIHOOD_RATIOS.get(event.blocked_action, []): role = Role(role_name) belief.scores[event.blocker][role] *= float(ratio) def _apply_challenge_multiplier(belief, event): if event.challenged not in belief.scores: return if event.result == "win": scale = CHALLENGE_WIN_RATIO else: scale = CHALLENGE_LOSE_RATIO belief.scores[event.challenged][event.claimed_role] *= scale A.3 Deck pressure 

Every role is damped by how many of its three copies are still unrevealed, raised to the power 0 .7 so that the damping is sublinear. A role with no copies left is driven to zero. 

def _apply_deck_pressure(belief, public_state): for role in Role: revealed = int(public_state.revealed_dead.get(role, 0)) remaining = max(0, 3 - revealed) if remaining <= 0: damp = 0.0 else: damp = (remaining / 3.0) ** 0.7 for player in belief.scores: belief.scores[player][role] *= damp 

A.4 Per-hand probability 

This function implements (4) and (5). The 0 .7 and 0 .3 weights are the blend that trades combinatorial correctness against responsiveness to accumulated claim evidence. 

def _hypergeometric_p_truth(p_role, hand_size, remaining_copies, deck_size=15): from math import comb remaining_copies = max(0, int(remaining_copies)) hand_size = max(1, int(hand_size)) deck_size = max(hand_size, int(deck_size)) if remaining_copies <= 0: return 0.0 non_copies = deck_size - remaining_copies if non_copies < 0: return 1.0 if hand_size > non_copies or hand_size > deck_size: p_zero = 0.0 else: numerator = comb(non_copies, hand_size) denominator = comb(deck_size, hand_size) p_zero = numerator / denominator if denominator > 0 else 0.0 p_hyper = 1.0 - p_zero p_independence = 1.0 - (1.0 - _clamp(p_role)) ** hand_size p_blended = 0.7 * p_hyper + 0.3 * p_independence return _clamp(p_blended) 

A.5 Threshold rule 

Every threshold constant quoted in the body appears here: the base values by claim context, the style deltas, and the three table-state adjustments. 

def _threshold_for_claim(claim_context, *, style="Balanced", public_state=None, perspective=None): remaining = int(claim_context.remaining_copies) if remaining <= 0: base = 0.99 elif claim_context.block_type == "Steal": base = 0.20 elif claim_context.action_name == "Assassinate": base = 0.35 elif claim_context.block_type == "Assassination": base = 0.35 else: base = 0.25 adjusted = float(base) + _style_threshold_delta(style) if public_state is not None: alive_players = [name for name, state in public_state.players.items() if int(state.influence_alive) > 0 ]num_alive = len(alive_players) if num_alive <= 2: adjusted += 0.10 elif num_alive <= 3: adjusted += 0.05 if perspective is not None and perspective in public_state.players: my_influence = int(public_state.players[perspective].influence_alive) if my_influence == 1: adjusted -= 0.08 for name in alive_players: if perspective and name == perspective: continue if int(public_state.players[name].coins) >= 7: adjusted += 0.06 break return _clamp(adjusted, 0.01, 0.99) def _style_threshold_delta(style): normalized = _normalize_style(style) if normalized == "Conservative": return -0.05 if normalized == "Aggressive": return 0.07 return 0.0 

A.6 Decision 

The recommendation is the comparison itself, together with the explanation string that carries the probability, the threshold, and the inputs that produced them. 

p_truth = _hypergeometric_p_truth(p_role_c, hand_size, remaining_copies) threshold = _threshold_for_claim( claim_context, style=style, public_state=public_state, perspective=claimant, )if p_truth < threshold: recommendation = "Challenge" else: recommendation = "Do not challenge" Appendix B Reward Definitions The paper’s central finding is that the reward definition, not the algorithm, decided which learned policy won. This appendix gives both definitions. 

B.1 Per-transition reward 

The shaped reward is the coin gain of the acting player plus the number of players eliminated on that transition. Under the win-aligned mode the per-step term is zeroed, and each transition is instead labelled with whether the acting player went on to win the game. 

shaped_reward = ((next_state["actor_coins"] - pre_coins) + (pre_alive - next_state["players_alive"]) )reward = float(shaped_reward) if reward_mode == "shaped" else 0.0 ... alive_players = [name for name, state in engine.public_state.players.items() if state.influence_alive > 0]winner = alive_players[0] if len(alive_players) == 1 else None for row in rows: row["actor_is_winner"] = int(winner is not None and row["actor"] == winner) if reward_mode == "win": for row in rows: row["reward"] = 0.0 

B.2 Environment step 

The two modes differ in a single condition. Shaped mode adds +1 whenever the chosen action matches the logged action, so it rewards imitating every player in the log. Win mode adds +1 only when the chosen action matches the logged action and 

the player who took it went on to win, so it rewards imitating winners only. Since the per-step term is zero in win mode, the win reward is exactly that indicator. 

row = self.current_rows[self.cursor] chosen_action = self.action_labels[int(action_index) % len(self.action_labels)] logged_action = row.get("action_name") reward = float(row.get("reward", 0.0)) if self.reward_mode == "shaped": if chosen_action == logged_action: reward += 1.0 else: if chosen_action == logged_action and int(row.get("actor_is_winner", 0)) == 1: reward += 1.0 done = bool(int(row.get("done", 0))) next_state = self._next_state_vector(row) 

Appendix C Training Setup 

C.1 Network 

The action-value function is a two-hidden-layer multilayer perceptron with ReLU activations and hidden width 128. 

class _Model(nn.Module): def __init__(self, in_dim, out_dim, hid_dim): super().__init__() self.net = nn.Sequential( nn.Linear(in_dim, hid_dim), nn.ReLU(), nn.Linear(hid_dim, hid_dim), nn.ReLU(), nn.Linear(hid_dim, out_dim), )def forward(self, x): return self.net(x) 

C.2 Defaults 

The training entry point fixes every hyperparameter quoted in the paper, including the learning rate, the discount factor, the replay and warm-up sizes, the target-network interval, the seed, and both exploration schedules. 

def train_dqn_policy( transitions_csv, out_dir, *, episodes=200, seed=42, gamma=0.98, learning_rate=1e-3, batch_size=64, buffer_size=10000, warmup_steps=256, target_update_steps=200, hidden_dim=128, epsilon_start=1.0, epsilon_end=0.05, epsilon_decay=0.995, exploration_mode="epsilon_greedy", tau_start=1.0, tau_end=0.1, tau_decay=0.995, compare_bc_dir=None, reward_mode="shaped", ): 

C.3 Optimiser 

The learning rate is applied through Adam over the policy network parameters. 

optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(policy.parameters(), lr=float(learning_rate)) 

C.4 Action selection and entropy 

Both exploration modes are implemented in the same loop, and each computes the per-step entropy of its own action distribution. For 𝜀 -greedy the entropy follows in closed form from 𝜀 and the action count, while for the Boltzmann policy it is computed from the softmax probabilities and therefore also reflects the spread of the learned action values. This is the measurement plotted in Fig. 13. 

if exploration_mode == "epsilon_greedy": if rng.random() < epsilon: action_index = rng.randrange(action_dim) else: action_index = policy.act(state) p_greedy = 1.0 - epsilon + epsilon / action_dim p_other = epsilon / action_dim step_entropy = float( -(p_greedy * np.log(p_greedy + 1e-12) + (action_dim - 1) * p_other * np.log(p_other + 1e-12)) )else: with torch.no_grad(): q_arr = policy.model( torch.tensor(state, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0) ).squeeze(0).numpy() scaled = q_arr / max(float(tau), 1e-6) scaled = scaled - float(np.max(scaled)) probs = np.exp(scaled) probs = probs / probs.sum() action_index = int( rng.choices(range(action_dim), weights=probs.tolist(), k=1)[0] )step_entropy = float(-np.sum(probs * np.log(probs + 1e-12))) 

C.5 Replay, Bellman target, and target sync 

Updates begin only after both the batch size and the warm-up threshold are met. The target is the standard one-step Bellman backup with the terminal flag masking the bootstrap term, and the target network is copied from the policy network on a fixed step interval. 

step = env.step(action_index) replay.push(state, action_index, step.reward, step.next_state, step.done) if len(replay) >= int(batch_size) and len(replay) >= int(warmup_steps): batch = replay.sample(batch_size, rng) s_batch = torch.tensor([item[0] for item in batch], dtype=torch.float32) a_batch = torch.tensor([item[1] for item in batch], dtype=torch.long) r_batch = torch.tensor([item[2] for item in batch], dtype=torch.float32) ns_batch = torch.tensor([item[3] for item in batch], dtype=torch.float32) d_batch = torch.tensor([item[4] for item in batch], dtype=torch.float32) q_values = policy.model(s_batch).gather(1, a_batch.unsqueeze(1)).squeeze(1) with torch.no_grad(): max_next_q = target.model(ns_batch).max(dim=1).values target_q = r_batch + float(gamma) * (1.0 - d_batch) * max_next_q loss = loss_fn(q_values, target_q) optimizer.zero_grad() loss.backward() optimizer.step() if int(target_update_steps) > 0 and global_steps % int(target_update_steps) == 0: target.load_state_dict(policy.state_dict()) 

C.6 Summary 

Table XIII collects the values above. The exploration-mode ablation varies only the exploration mode and its schedule, holding everything else fixed. The behavior-cloning baseline uses a logistic-regression head over the same feature vector, and the supervised comparison uses a Random Forest. Appendix D The Game of Coup This appendix summarises the published rules of Coup, so that the modelling choices in the paper can be checked against the game they describe. TABLE XIII DQN training defaults. Parameter Value Network 2 hidden layers, width 128, ReLU Optimiser Adam, learning rate 1 × 10 −3                   

> Loss Mean squared Bellman error Discount factor 𝛾 0.98 Batch size 64 Replay buffer size 10,000 Warm-up steps 256 Target-network update interval 200 steps Seed 42 Episodes (shaped-reward run) 100 Episodes (win-reward run) 1000
> 𝜀 schedule 1.0→0.05, decay 0.995/episode
> 𝜏 schedule (softmax mode) 1.0→0.1, decay 0.995/episode Reward modes shaped, win-aligned

D.1 Setup and Goal 

The deck holds fifteen character cards, three copies each of Duke, Assassin, Captain, Ambassador, and Contessa. The cards are shuffled and two are dealt to each player, who may look at them but must keep them face down. The remainder forms the Court deck in the middle of the table. Each player receives two coins from the Treasury, and all money is kept visible. The goal is to eliminate the influence of every other player and be the last survivor. 

D.2 Influence 

The face-down cards in front of a player are that player’s influence, and the characters printed on them are the characters the player may legitimately claim. Whenever a player loses an influence they turn one of their own cards face up, choosing which one themselves. A revealed card stays face up, is visible to everyone, and no longer provides influence. A player who has lost both cards is exiled from the game and returns all coins to the Treasury. The game ends when one player remains. 

D.3 Turn Structure 

Play proceeds clockwise. On each turn the active player chooses exactly one action and may not pass. Once the action is declared, the other players are given an opportunity to challenge it or to counteract it, and challenges are resolved before the action or counteraction they target. An action that is neither challenged nor counteracted succeeds automatically. Once play moves on, a challenge can no longer be issued retroactively. 

D.4 Actions 

A player may choose any action they can afford. The general actions in Table XIV are always available and require no role claim. The character actions in Table XV each require the player to claim a specific character, truthfully or not. No card need be shown unless the claim is challenged.         

> TABLE XIV General actions, available to every player without a role claim. Action Effect Can be blocked by Income Take 1 coin Nobody Foreign Aid Take 2 coins Duke Coup Pay 7 coins, target loses an influence Nobody

A player who begins a turn holding ten or more coins is required to launch a Coup as their only action. A Coup always succeeds and cannot be blocked or challenged, since it involves no role claim. If the target of a Steal holds only one coin, only that coin is taken. An Exchange lets the player choose freely between their current cards and the two drawn, returning any two cards to the Court deck afterwards. 

D.5 Counteractions 

Counteractions block another player’s action and work exactly like character actions: the blocker claims a character, truthfully or not, need show nothing unless challenged, and succeeds automatically if unchallenged (Table XVI). When an action is successfully counteracted the action fails, but any coins paid as its cost remain spent. TABLE XV Character actions. Each requires claiming the listed character. Character Action Effect Can be blocked by Duke Tax Take 3 coins Nobody Assassin Assassinate Pay 3 coins, target loses an influence Contessa Captain Steal Take 2 coins from another player Captain, Ambassador Ambassador Exchange Draw 2 from the Court deck, return 2 Nobody TABLE XVI Counteractions. Character claimed Blocks Result Duke Foreign Aid Target receives no coins that turn Contessa Assassination Assassination fails, fee stays spent Captain or Ambassador Steal Thief receives no coins that turn 

D.6 Challenges 

Any action or counteraction that uses character influence can be challenged, and any player may issue the challenge whether or not they are involved. A challenged player must prove the claim by showing the relevant character card. If they cannot, or choose not to, they lose the challenge. If they can, the challenger loses it. Whoever loses immediately loses an influence. A player who wins a challenge by showing the card returns it to the Court deck, reshuffles, and draws a random replacement. They have therefore not lost an influence, and the other players no longer know which card they hold. This swap is the one published rule the simulator in this paper omits, as noted in Challenges and Limitations. If an action is successfully challenged the entire action fails and any coins paid as its cost are returned. 

D.7 Double Loss on Assassination 

It is possible to lose two influence in a single turn. A player who challenges an Assassin and loses the challenge loses one influence for the failed challenge and then a second for the successful assassination. The same applies to a player who bluffs a Contessa block, is challenged, and cannot show the card. 

D.8 Relation to the Model 

The five characters are the support of the belief state. The coin costs and the forced Coup at ten coins are the legality constraints enforced in the simulator, in event validation, and in the interface. The blocking structure in Tables XV and XVI is what makes a single turn expand into the branch structure of Fig. 5, and it is the reason a Steal block carries a lower challenge threshold than other claims, since two different characters can make it. The challenge resolution rule supplies the strongest evidence the belief tracker ever receives, which is why a won challenge multiplies the claimed role by 10 .0 and a lost one by 0.05.