Beyond Placement and Articulation: Usage-Driven Code Scenes for Embodied
Interaction
Zijian Xiao12∗, Zipeng Ye2, Jinkun Hao1, Xiong Yang12∗, Yuchen Xie2, Ran Yi1†
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2Meituan
Abstract
Indoor scene synthesis provides essential environments for
embodied AI, robotic manipulation, and simulation-based
policy learning. Recent code-based scene generation methods
produce editable and extensible environments, yet they remain
focused on visual construction and object-level articulation,
leaving the functional usage of scenes largely unmodeled.
To address this problem, we present RoomWright, an agentic
usage-driven framework for generating 3D scenes represented
entirely as code for embodied interaction. RoomWright per-
forms usage-driven object reasoning, which treats each anchor
as a task centre and admits task-required objects and their af-
fordances. A code agent further enables multi-part interaction
by compiling each interaction into a trigger–condition–effect
rule that updates structured object states, capturing causal
dependencies across objects. Moreover, since manipuland
orientation is ambiguous and hard to recover from pixels,
RoomWright alleviates this via annotation-informed usage-
guided orientation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. The resulting scenes are exe-
cutable, editable, and simulation-ready, providing interactive
environments for embodied AI and policy learning.
Introduction
Indoor scene synthesis provides essential environments for
embodied AI, robotic manipulation, and simulation-based
policy learning. Conventional methods typically generate or
retrieve individual 3D assets and then arrange them into a
scene. Although these approaches can produce visually re-
alistic environments, the resulting scenes are usually repre-
sented as static geometry, making their structure, semantics,
and behaviors difficult to inspect, modify, and extend.
Recent advances in the coding capabilities of large lan-
guage models and VLM (Vision Language Models) suggest
a new paradigm in which an entire 3D scene is represented
as executable code. Code-based representations are highly
flexible and preserve explicit modeling procedures, semantic
structures, and construction histories. They can be executed
for verification, edited at test time, and iteratively extended
without rebuilding the scene from scratch. These properties
make code a promising representation not only for procedu-
ral asset generation, but also for complete and interactive 3D
∗Work done during an internship at Meituan.
†Corresponding author
The fan speed is controlled by 
a knob with multiple settings.
The kettle, base, and button 
support coordinated interactions.
the button 
toggles the lamp
Figure
1:
The
scenes
automatically
generated
by
RoomWright. Each object in the scene is independently sep-
arable and possesses its own articulation structure, while
different parts of an object, and even multiple objects, ex-
hibit rich coordinated interactions. The objects, the scene
layout, and all interaction behaviors are represented entirely
as code.
environments.
Recent works SceneCode (Wang et al. 2026) and Code-as-
Room (Yang et al. 2026b) have begun to explore the gener-
ation of scenes represented entirely as code. They use VLM
to evaluate rendered images, generate procedural assets, and
arXiv:2608.18840v1  [cs.RO]  19 Aug 2026


refine object placement. SceneCode also exploits code to as-
sign articulation attributes, allowing objects such as doors,
windows, and cabinets to open, close, or slide. However,
these studies remain primarily focused on visual scene con-
struction and object-level articulation. We argue that code-
represented scenes should go beyond placement and artic-
ulation, and should instead model how a scene is actually
used.
We present RoomWright, a usage-driven framework for
generating code-represented 3D scenes for embodied in-
teraction. Our key insight is to preserve semantic annota-
tions during asset generation and use them to support scene-
level reasoning: the language model performs semantic and
task reasoning, while deterministic geometry and physics
modules compute coordinates, orientations, and executable
behaviors. (i) Usage-driven object reasoning and user-
centered composition. Existing methods do not explicitly
capture this usage structure. They largely rely on the visual
judgment of a vision language model. However, a functional
scene is not simply a collection of objects that appears visu-
ally plausible. Object selection, placement, orientation, and
interaction are closely determined by intended usage. When
people search for an object, they often recall the activity in
which it was last used. RoomWright performs usage-driven
object reasoning and user-centered composition: given an
intended activity, the system infers the required objects and
their functional relationships, and represents scene organi-
zation using user-relative relations, functional zones, and
pairwise spatial constraints, which a geometric solver then
converts into collision-free metric placements, allowing the
language model to reason about usage while explicit geome-
try handles numerical coordinates.
(ii) Code-based multi-part interaction. Current interac-
tive scene generation stops at articulation, which specifies
how an individual object part can move, such as a door rotat-
ing around a hinge; embodied environments, however, often
require causal interactions involving multiple parts or mul-
tiple objects, such as pressing a switch to turn on a lamp,
turning a knob to different positions to control the speed of
a fan, or placing a kettle on a charging base to activate an
indicator (Figure 1), which cannot be represented by isolated
articulation parameters alone. In RoomWright, a code agent
enables multi-part interaction by compiling each interaction
into a trigger–condition–effect rule over structured object
states, supporting coordinated motion among multiple parts,
causal dependencies across different objects, and changes in
physical or visual states.
(iii) Annotation-informed usage-guided orientation.
The orientation of manipulable objects is difficult to de-
termine from rendered appearance, since important interac-
tion features may be small, occluded, or visually similar to
other local structures. Moreover, the meaning of an object’s
front direction depends on its usage. RoomWright adopts
annotation-informed usage-guided orientation. We leverage
the code representation to record semantic annotations dur-
ing the modeling stage, providing the VLM with information
beyond raw pixels so that it can infer the intrinsic properties
of objects without relying on visual appearance alone. Based
on these annotations, we assign each manipulable object a
use-facing direction according to how it is intended to be
used, thereby alleviating the orientation problem of manipu-
lands.
In summary, our main contributions are:
• We propose RoomWright, a code scene generation agentic
framework that produces editable and simulation-ready
environments for embodied interaction. Extensive exper-
iments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
• We introduce usage-driven object reasoning and user-
centered composition, deriving scene content and spatial
organization from intended activities and functional rela-
tionships.
• We enable multi-part interaction via a code agent that
represents each interaction as a trigger–condition–effect
rule over declared object states, capturing causal depen-
dencies beyond single-object articulation.
• Weenableannotation-informedusage-guided orientation,
where semantic annotations recorded during modeling
guide the assignment of use-facing directions to manipu-
lable objects, alleviating orientation ambiguity.
Related Work
Agentic Scene Synthesis
Indoor scene synthesis has progressed from procedural and
data-driven methods (Raistrick et al. 2024; Paschalidou et al.
2021; Tang et al. 2024; Zhu et al. 2025) to open-vocabulary
systems that use LLMs or VLMs for layout and scene-graph
planning (Feng et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2024; Çelen et al.
2024; Fu et al. 2024; Sun et al. 2025b; Luo et al. 2026;
Hao et al. 2026). Recent agentic methods further introduce
iterative planning, tool-using, and feedback. SceneWeaver
employs self-reflection, HSM organizes generation hierar-
chically, and Code-as-Room uses structured execution and
persistent memory for image-conditioned room synthesis
(Yang et al. 2026a; Pun et al. 2026; Yang et al. 2026b). Scene-
Smith generates simulation-ready environments through de-
signer–critic–orchestrator collaboration, whereas SAGE in-
corporates visual and physical critics into a task-conditioned
generation loop (Pfaff et al. 2026; Xia et al. 2026). These
methods improve semantic fidelity and physical validity, but
largely focus on scene composition rather than generating
functional dependencies among scene entities.
Code-Based 3D Generation
Code provides an interpretable and editable representation
for 3D content. Existing methods generate shape programs,
procedural models, CAD code, or Blender scripts from lan-
guage and visual inputs (Jones et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2025a;
Du et al. 2024; Hu et al. 2024; Lu et al. 2025; Yin et al.
2026). Related work studies part-level object representations
and articulated-asset generation (Mo et al. 2019; Xiang et al.
2020; Lei et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024;
Zhou et al. 2026). Most relevant to our setting, SceneCode
generates part-aware object programs and compiles them
into simulation assets with inferred revolute and prismatic
joints (Wang et al. 2026). Code-as-Room represents com-
plete indoor scenes, including layouts, geometry, materials,


v
v
Scene Planning
v
v
Interaction Induction
Usage-Driven Object Reasoning
Room Shell Planning
Symbolic Scene State
𝑆= (𝑂, 𝐹, 𝐺𝑥)
Simulation-Ready
Asset Generation
v
PBR Material & Texture Gen.
v
v
v
on_press(switch_01):
    set_state(lamp_01, “on”)
on_rotate(dial_01, v):
    set_speed(fan_01, v)
    update_display(display_01, v)
</>
Interaction Code Gen
v
v
v
back_body = _backrest_mesh()
HingeRevolute(width=0.46, 
height=0.56, …
v
“id”: “chair_01”,
  “parts”: [
   {“id”: “seat”, “type”: “mesh”},
   {“id”: “back”, “type”: “mesh”}…
</>
Articulated Code Generation
& Part Annotation
{…}
Physical Property Generation
Layout Generation
mass, inertia, 
friction, collision…
v
Final Interactive 3D Scene!
v
v
Physical Simulation
v
Rendered Validation
Iterative Refinement
Critic
v
Prompt
Usage-guided Orientation
task1
task2
1
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
Task-Centric Expansion
2
Figure 2: Pipeline overview of RoomWright. Starting from a natural-language room description, RoomWright build an interactive
3D scene through three stages: (1) scene planning infers a usage-driven symbolic scene state with object, support, and interaction
relations; (2) simulation-ready asset generation produces simulation-ready articulated assets with semantic parts, physical
properties, and executable interactions; (3) layout generation optimizes object placement through geometric reasoning, visual
critique, and physical simulation. The generated scene is directly executable in embodied environments.
and lighting as executable Blender code (Yang et al. 2026b).
Nevertheless, prior code-based systems primarily represent
geometry, layout, appearance, or object-level kinematics. We
instead generate functionally interactive scene programs that
jointly encode articulated mechanisms, interaction states,
and cross-entity behaviors such as switches controlling lights
from user intent, making scenes both physically actionable
and behaviorally coherent.
Method
Overview
Given a text description of a room, RoomWright produces
a fully instantiated, interactive and physically executable 3D
scene: a set of simulation-ready articulated assets, a metric
layout that places each asset with a pose, and an interaction
script that specifies which controllers actuate which targets
and with what effect. The output can be loaded directly into an
Omniverse-based physics simulator such as NVIDIA Isaac
Sim (or the OmniGibson (Li et al. 2023) environment built
on it), where a robot can flip a switch and see the lamp turn
on, turn a program dial and see the display change, or press
a microwave button and see the panel light up. Unlike prior
scene generators that stop at a static arrangement of rigid
props, our target is a scene whose every declared interaction
can actually be triggered in simulation.
RoomWright Agentic System
Figure 2 shows the overall architecture of RoomWright,
which consists of three stages:
(1) Scene Planning. Given the room description, we first
plan the architectural shell of the room, including its shape,
floor, and wall layout. A usage-driven reasoning chain then
expands the explicitly named objects into a complete, op-
erable scene state S = (O, F, Gx), comprising an object
set O, a support forest F recording, for each object, which
object it rests on and on which supporting surface, and an
interaction graph Gx specifying how each object is operated.
The chain treats each major floor-standing anchor as a task
centre, radially admits only the companion objects that the
task necessitates (growing the object set O and the support
forest F), and then exhaustively induces, for every object,
its interaction edges e = (s, t, m, ϕ), which link controllers,
targets, and named parts under a closed method vocabulary,
so that the scene holds only what its use needs but exposes


everything that use can touch.
(2) Simulation-ready Asset Generation. We use Arti-
craft (Zhou et al. 2026) as the backend for articulated-object
code generation. To preserve the LLM’s spatial understand-
ing acquired during modeling, we additionally extract part-
level annotations and their 3D positions in the asset coordi-
nate frame:
A = {(ℓi, pi)}N
i=1,
(1)
where ℓi denotes the semantic label of part i, and pi ∈R3
denotes its local position.
To support physics-based interaction, each asset is com-
piled into addressable links with collision geometry and dy-
namic properties. Hinged and sliding parts are converted into
revolute and prismatic joints with inferred origins, axes, and
limits. For each link ℓ, we estimate
π(ℓ) =
 mℓ, cℓ, Iℓ, µℓ, Cℓ

,
(2)
where mℓ, cℓ, Iℓ, µℓ, and Cℓdenote its mass, center of mass,
inertia, friction, and simplified convex collision geometry,
respectively.
To support interactions beyond object-level articulation,
we compile each edge e = (s, t, m, ϕ) in the interaction
graph Gx into a trigger–condition–effect rule over object
state. The trigger is derived from method m, the conditions
from the interaction’s prerequisites, and the effect applies ϕ
as the resulting object-state or visual-property update. The
resulting assets, poses, and interaction runtime are directly
loaded into OmniGibson (Li et al. 2023) for scripted valida-
tion and embodied-agent interaction.
To
support
coherent
scene
appearance,
we
use
FLUX.2 (Labs 2025) to generate tileable albedo maps for
architectural surfaces and planar decorations, which are ap-
plied using closed-form UV projections. Objects retain their
part-level semantic colors, while PBR metalness and rough-
ness are assigned according to material class. This process
produces a consistent appearance without explicit UV un-
wrapping or per-object texturing.
(3) Layout Generation. A symbolic layout program ex-
pressed in the user’s reference frame (support relations, user-
viewpoint spatial relations, and usage-guided orientations
for manipulands) is grounded by a geometric solver into
collision-free poses. We then introduce a vision-in-the-loop
critic that refines the provisional scene according to rendered
observations and the upstream layout guidance. The critic
evaluates visual realism, functional consistency, spatial or-
ganization, and completeness, and invokes scene-editing to
adjust object placement, orientation, and inter-object rela-
tions. Each revision is validated by physics-simulation tools,
which resolves geometric conflicts and rejects modifications
that introduce collisions, instability, or other physical viola-
tions. This iterative process preserves the intended high-level
organization while improving the visual and physical plausi-
bility of the final layout.
Usage-Driven Object Reasoning
Formally, given a room description d and the bare set OP
of objects it explicitly names, the objective of scene reasoning
is to expand this seed into a complete, operable scene state
S =
 O, F, Gx

,
(3)
Algorithm 1: Usage-Driven Object Reasoning
Require: room description d
Zoned completion (one pass).
1: (Z, O, F) ←R(d)
▷zones, seed + inferred objects,
support forest F
Phase 1 — Task-centric expansion (radial, per an-
chor).
2: for all major floor anchor a ∈O do
3:
τa ←R(a, d)
▷name the human task a centres
4:
Ca ←R(a, τa, O) ▷one-hop companions the task
needs; necessity-gated top-k
5:
O ←O ∪Ca;
F ←F ∪{(c →a) : c ∈Ca}
6: end for
Phase 2 — Interaction induction (exhaustive, per ob-
ject).
7: for all object o ∈O do
8:
Gx ←Gx ∪R(o)
▷every affordance a user
actuates, uncurated
9: end for
10: return S = (O, F, Gx)
comprising an object set O ⊇OP , a support forest F record-
ing, for each object, which object it rests on and on which
supporting surface, and an interaction graph Gx specifying
how each object is operated. We implement this expansion
as a usage-driven reasoning process. Specifically, we for-
mulate reasoning as a hierarchical expansion that descends
the room’s functional structure rather than flattening it into
a prompt transcription.
Prior methods typically enumerate objects sequentially ac-
cording to a predefined spatial order or infer them from lo-
cal visual observations. Consequently, the generated object
composition lacks a systematic connection to how the room
is intended to be used. Our process instead grounds every de-
cision in usage mainly across two phases (Algorithm 1): each
object is admitted because an activity requires it, and each
interaction because it is a way a user operates the object that
bears it. The result is a coherent functional hierarchy, com-
prising anchors, the tasks they centre, the objects those tasks
demand, and the affordances those objects expose, rather
than an unstructured collection of objects.
Task-Centric Expansion.
The reasoner treats each major
floor anchor as a task centre: it first identifies the activity the
anchor supports, and only then determines the objects that
activity requires within a user’s reach. Expansion is radial,
not chained: every candidate must connect to the anchor’s
task within a single hop, preventing drift through long as-
sociative chains. It is also necessity-gated: candidates are
scored by how essential they are to the task, and only the
most essential are admitted, with the rest held as an optional
pool. Admitted objects extend both O and the support forest
F, each bound to the anchor whose use justifies it.
Interaction Induction.
For each object the reasoner in-
duces its interaction edges, e
=
 s, t, m, ϕ

∈Gx,
each linking a source s to a target t, which may be the object
itself, another object, or a named part o#part, under an in-


teraction method m from a closed vocabulary M, with ϕ the
resulting change of state. In contrast to the necessity-gated
completion, induction is exhaustive and functional: every
affordance a user could actuate becomes a realizable edge,
derived from how the object is used rather than its category.
The part names referenced by edges form a naming contract
carried into asset generation.
Code-Based Multi-part Interaction
For each object, the reasoner induces its interaction edges,
e =
 s, t, m, ϕ

∈Gx , a code agent then compiles each
edge into executable behavior. Rather than emitting isolated
articulation parameters, the agent lowers every edge into a
structured specification comprising the target’s mutable state
together with a trigger, a set of conditions, and a set of effects
that transition it, and pairs it with a grounding that resolves
each abstract role in the edge to a concrete, addressable entity
in the simulated asset: the trigger is the actuation signal that
initiates the interaction (a joint reading or a contact event), the
conditions are the prerequisites under which it is valid, and
the effects specify how the kinematic, physical, or visual state
of the target is updated. These specifications are executed by
a single generic runtime shared across all assets. Since edges
reference named parts rather than fixed geometric primitives,
the compiled behavior is decoupled from any specific asset
implementation: the part names carried by each edge form a
naming contract into asset generation, so that every control
and feedback element is later realized as an addressable link
to which the runtime binds, and where an edge requires a
controller the scene lacks, that controller is admitted into O.
Expressing interactions as structured, runtime-executed code
rather than isolated articulation parameters makes behaviors
inspectable, editable, and composable, and lets coordinated
behavior across multiple parts or objects emerge from the
joint execution of individual edges.
Usage-guided Orientation for Small Manipulands
Manipuland orientation is difficult to infer from visual ob-
servations alone. Moreover, the notion of front is often
ambiguous for manipulands, as their appropriate orientation
is determined by intended use rather than visual geometry
alone.
Different from prior methods, we first introduce the an-
notation information during code-based modeling of object.
Our key observation is that code-based asset generation al-
ready exposes stronger signals than downstream pixels. We
fuse the annotation map A with a small set of rendered views
of the asset. The annotations contribute precise semantic
structure; the images contribute holistic shape and appear-
ance cues. A VLM reasons over this fused representation and
predicts an intrinsic orientation frame (f, u).
To obtain a user-centric initialization of the front direction,
we ask the VLM to predict two additional anchors in the
normalized bounding-box frame: a hand anchor h, where
the user would contact or operate the object, and an arm
anchor a, indicating the approach side of the body. Their
displacement
duse = h −a
(4)
provides a geometric cue for how the object should face in
use. We align this vector to the nearest principal box axis
orthogonal to the estimated up axis, producing the final use-
facing direction fuse, which is used to initialize the object’s
pose during placement.
Experiments
Baselines.
Code-based full-scene generation is a recently
emerging task with only a few directly comparable meth-
ods. We compare our approach with SceneCode (Wang et al.
2026) and Code-as-Room (Yang et al. 2026b), two represen-
tative systems that generate complete indoor scenes using
executable code. SceneCode supports part-aware articulated
objects and simulation-ready asset compilation, whereas
Code-as-Room synthesizes room-scale geometry, materials,
and lighting as Blender programs. We additionally compare
with SceneSmith (Pfaff et al. 2026), a retrieval-based agen-
tic framework that serves as the scene-generation backbone
of SceneCode and has demonstrated substantial relevance to
embodied AI.
Input text descriptions.
To comprehensively evaluate the
capabilities of each method, we curate 28 room-level prompts
covering diverse room categories and functional require-
ments. The prompts are organized into three difficulty levels
according to their descriptive complexity: short and con-
cise descriptions, medium-length descriptions with addi-
tional spatial and functional constraints, and long, detailed
descriptions specifying complex scene composition and in-
teractions. The complete prompt set is provided in the sup-
plementary material.
Automatic evaluation.
We adopt the scene-level metrics
from SceneEval (Tam et al. 2026): Collision-free (frac-
tion of objects free of inter-object collision), Navig. (nav-
igable floor-area ratio after eroding object footprints), In-
bound (fraction of objects lying within the room bounds),
Opening-clear (fraction of doors and windows left unob-
structed), Support (fraction of objects resting on a valid
supporting surface rather than floating or clipping), Access.
(reachability of each object’s functional side), ObjCount (sat-
isfaction of object-count requirements), ObjAttr (satisfac-
tion of object-attribute requirements), OO-Rel (satisfaction
of object–object spatial-relationship requirements), and OA-
Rel (satisfaction of object–architecture relationship require-
ments). All metrics are reported as percentages and higher is
better.
Furthermore, we evaluate interactive content using four
metrics: Interactive Objects (IO), objects supporting exe-
cutable actions or state changes; Articulated Objects (AO),
objects with revolute or prismatic joints; Complex Non-
Hinge Interactions (CHI), functional relations beyond in-
dependent articulation; and Multi-Part Coordination (MPC),
coordinated interaction groups involving multiple parts or
objects. IO and AO are counted per object, CHI per func-
tional relation, and MPC per coordination group; thus, these
metrics are complementary rather than additive.


A warm family dining room is anchored by a large rectangular wooden dining table, surrounded by six chairs. The table...
A modern open-plan office occupies the room, with a large L-shaped desk holding a dual-monitor, a wireless keyboard…
A cozy adult bedroom centers on a queen-size bed with a padded headboard against the wall. A nightstand stands on …
Ours
SceneSmith
SceneCode
Code-as-Room
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of the four methods. RoomWright produces layouts with better plausibility than the baselines,
and achieves highly realistic visual quality even though it relies entirely on code, without any 3D generation or asset retrieval.
Overall Comparisons
Quantitative results are shown in Table 1, while Figure 3
shows the visual quality. SceneCode lacks holistic scene-
level planning and instead generates code through a sequen-
tial, step-by-step VLM process. Consequently, local code-
generation errors may accumulate and become amplified
during scene assembly, reducing overall quality. Code-as-
Room produces the lowest visual quality in our comparison,
as it provides limited physical guarantees and relies on a
relatively coarse code-generation pipeline, resulting in ap-
proximate scene geometry and non-interactive objects. Sce-
neSmith generates visually appealing scenes but similarly
adopts a sequential planning strategy and constructs scenes
primarily through asset retrieval or image-to-3D generation.
Its outputs therefore do not inherit the interpretability and
editability of fully code-based representations, and most ob-
jects remain non-interactive. In contrast, our method achieves
the highest overall quality among the evaluated code-based
approaches, producing detailed and complete scenes. Its user-
centered composition improves asset completeness and lay-
out plausibility, while supporting substantially richer inter-
active behaviors. Table 2 reports the number of interactive
objects. Our method generates more interactive objects than
the baselines and, beyond articulated objects, supports a di-
verse range of complex interaction types that are not available
in the other methods.
Ablation Study
Ablation study of usage-driven object reasoning
As
shown in Figure 5, the usage-driven object reasoning chain
produces a richer and more functionally plausible ob-
ject composition, including contextually necessary objects
and accessible interaction controls. These objects are ab-
sent when the usage-driven reasoning chain is removed.
SceneCode, SceneSmith, and Code-as-Room also fail to gen-
erate them, revealing a limitation of prior methods that con-
struct scenes through sequential object-by-object planning
without explicitly reasoning about intended use.


Method
Collision-free ↑
Navig. ↑
In-bound ↑
Opening-clear ↑
Support ↑
Access. ↑
ObjCount ↑
ObjAttr ↑
OO-Rel ↑
OA-Rel ↑
SceneCode
91.2
99.0
81.2
96.4
26.9
26.1
38.1
30.7
16.1
55.6
Code-as-Room
45.5
89.5
73.3
47.2
51.9
63.1
37.0
56.7
20.5
22.2
SceneSmith
95.0
99.6
99.7
98.0
58.4
39.8
48.8
42.5
27.0
42.2
Ours
95.9
97.3
99.7
95.7
53.6
65.6
57.0
64.6
22.4
40.6
Table 1: SceneEval comparison across four scene-generation methods (mean over 28 scenes). Higher is better (↑) for all metrics.
The best result in each column is shown in bold, and the second-best result is underlined.
Method
IO↑
AO↑
CHI↑
MPC↑
Code-as-Room
–
–
–
–
SceneSmith
2.4
2.4
–
–
SceneCode
4.4
4.4
–
–
Ours
16.4
13.2
6.4
3.6
Table 2: Interactive objects and behaviors in generated
scenes. ’–’ indicates that the method does not provide the
corresponding attribute.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4: Simulation of generated interactions. (a)(b) The
gripper grasps the handle and closes the revolute door. (c)
The arm approaches the button while the display remains off.
(d) Pressing the button lights up the display, demonstrating
a causal interaction.
Ablation study of usage-guided orientation
Figure 6
demonstrates the effectiveness of usage-guided orientation.
The blue arrows indicate the front directions predicted by the
VLM, while the yellow arrows denote the use-facing direc-
tion inferred by our agent. In all four cases, object placement
is performed directly by the corresponding agentic system.
Our method preserves detailed part-level annotations from
the initial modeling stage, including individual keyboard
keys as well as the mouse buttons and scroll wheel. This
avoids requiring the VLM to recover critical orientation cues
from visually ambiguous rendered views. The inferred use-
facing direction further guides object placement, enabling
our method to be the only one that correctly orients and
arranges both the keyboard and mouse.
Robot interaction
As shown in Figure 4, our scene can be imported into Isaac
Sim for robot manipulation. Movable parts of objects remain
Ours w/o UR
Code-as-Room
SceneCode
SceneSmith
Ours
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison with and without usage-
driven object reasoning (UR in the figure).
SceneSmith
SceneCode
Ours w/o UO
Ours
Figure 6: Comparison of manipuland placement with and
without usage-guided orientation (UO in the figure).
independent links with compiled joints. Beyond geometry,
each asset carries a generated interaction manifest, including
actuator joints, responder materials, and trigger rules, which
is executed by a generic runtime that closes the loop from
actuation to feedback.
Conclusion
We presented RoomWright, a usage-driven framework that
generates 3D scenes represented entirely as code. By deriving
scene content from intended activities, enabling multi-part
interaction through structured behavior code, and assigning
usage-guided orientations from modeling-time annotations,
RoomWright goes beyond visual construction and object-
level articulation to model how a scene is actually used.
Experiments show that it produces plausible, realistic, and
executable interactive scenes for embodied AI.


References
Çelen, A.; Han, G.; Schindler, K.; Van Gool, L.; Armeni,
I.; Obukhov, A.; and Wang, X. 2024. I-design: Personalized
llm interior designer. In European Conference on Computer
Vision, 217–234. Springer.
Chen, Z.; Walsman, A.; Memmel, M.; Mo, K.; Fang, A.; Ve-
muri, K.; Wu, A.; Fox, D.; and Gupta, A. 2024. Urdformer: A
pipeline for constructing articulated simulation environments
from real-world images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11656.
Du, Y.; Chen, S.; Zan, W.; Li, P.; Wang, M.; Song, D.; Li, B.;
Hu, Y.; and Wang, B. 2024. BlenderLLM: Training Large
Language Models for Computer-Aided Design with Self-
improvement. arXiv 2024. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14203.
Feng, W.; Zhu, W.; Fu, T.-j.; Jampani, V.; Akula, A.; He, X.;
Basu, S.; Wang, X. E.; and Wang, W. Y. 2023. Layoutgpt:
Compositional visual planning and generation with large lan-
guage models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36: 18225–18250.
Fu, R.; Wen, Z.; Liu, Z.; and Sridhar, S. 2024. Anyhome:
Open-vocabulary generation of structured and textured 3d
homes. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 52–
70. Springer.
Hao, J.; Liang, N.; Luo, Z.; Xu, X.; Zhong, W.; Yi, R.; Jin, Y.;
Lyu, Z.; Zheng, F.; Ma, L.; et al. 2026. Mesatask: Towards
task-driven tabletop scene generation via 3d spatial reason-
ing. Advances in neural information processing systems, 38:
122057–122099.
Hu, Z.; Iscen, A.; Jain, A.; Kipf, T.; Yue, Y.; Ross, D. A.;
Schmid, C.; and Fathi, A. 2024. Scenecraft: An llm agent
for synthesizing 3d scenes as blender code. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning.
Jones, R. K.; Barton, T.; Xu, X.; Wang, K.; Jiang, E.; Guer-
rero, P.; Mitra, N. J.; and Ritchie, D. 2020. Shapeassembly:
Learning to generate programs for 3d shape structure syn-
thesis. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(6): 1–20.
Labs, B. F. 2025.
FLUX.2: Frontier Visual Intelligence.
https://bfl.ai/blog/flux-2.
Lei, J.; Deng, C.; Shen, W. B.; Guibas, L. J.; and Daniilidis,
K. 2023. Nap: Neural 3d articulated object prior. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36: 31878–31894.
Li, C.; Zhang, R.; Wong, J.; Gokmen, C.; Srivastava, S.;
Martín-Martín, R.; Wang, C.; Levine, G.; Lingelbach, M.;
Sun, J.; et al. 2023. Behavior-1k: A benchmark for embodied
ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In
Conference on Robot Learning, 80–93. PMLR.
Liu, J.; Tam, H. I. I.; Mahdavi-Amiri, A.; and Savva, M. 2024.
Cage: Controllable articulation generation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 17880–17889.
Lu, S.; Chen, G.; Dinh, N. A.; Lang, I.; Holtzman, A.; and
Hanocka, R. 2025. Ll3m: Large language 3d modelers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.08228.
Luo, Z.; Yang, Y.; Xu, X.; Hao, J.; Lyu, Z.; Zheng, F.; Pang,
J.; and Fu, Y. 2026. STABLE: Simulation-Ready Tabletop
Layout Generation via a Semantics-Physics Dual System.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.16137.
Mo, K.; Zhu, S.; Chang, A. X.; Yi, L.; Tripathi, S.; Guibas,
L. J.; and Su, H. 2019. Partnet: A large-scale benchmark
for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3d object under-
standing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 909–918.
Paschalidou, D.; Kar, A.; Shugrina, M.; Kreis, K.; Geiger,
A.; and Fidler, S. 2021. Atiss: Autoregressive transformers
for indoor scene synthesis. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 34: 12013–12026.
Pfaff, N.; Cohn, T.; Zakharov, S.; Cory, R.; and Tedrake, R.
2026. Scenesmith: Agentic generation of simulation-ready
indoor scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09153.
Pun, H. I. D.; Tam, H. I. I.; Wang, A. T.; Huo, X.; Chang,
A. X.; and Savva, M. 2026. Hsm: Hierarchical scene motifs
for multi-scale indoor scene generation. In 2026 Interna-
tional Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 1356–1367. IEEE.
Raistrick, A.; Mei, L.; Kayan, K.; Yan, D.; Zuo, Y.; Han, B.;
Wen, H.; Parakh, M.; Alexandropoulos, S.; Lipson, L.; et al.
2024. Infinigen indoors: Photorealistic indoor scenes using
procedural generation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
21783–21794.
Sun, C.; Han, J.; Deng, W.; Wang, X.; Qin, Z.; and Gould, S.
2025a. 3d-gpt: Procedural 3d modeling with large language
models.
In 2025 International Conference on 3D Vision
(3DV), 1253–1263. IEEE.
Sun, F.-Y.; Liu, W.; Gu, S.; Lim, D.; Bhat, G.; Tombari, F.; Li,
M.; Haber, N.; and Wu, J. 2025b. Layoutvlm: Differentiable
optimization of 3d layout via vision-language models. In
Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, 29469–29478.
Tam, H. I. I.; Pun, H. I. D.; Wang, A. T.; Chang, A. X.;
and Savva, M. 2026. SceneEval: Evaluating semantic coher-
ence in text-conditioned 3D indoor scene synthesis. In 2026
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision (WACV), 7355–7365. IEEE.
Tang, J.; Nie, Y.; Markhasin, L.; Dai, A.; Thies, J.; and
Nießner, M. 2024. Diffuscene: Denoising diffusion mod-
els for generative indoor scene synthesis. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 20507–20518.
Wang, P.; Wang, Y.; Li, L.; Yang, Z.; Lin, K. Q.; Li, Y.; and
Cheng, Y. 2026. SceneCode: Executable World Programs
for Editable Indoor Scenes with Articulated Objects. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2605.19587.
Xia, H.; Li, X.; Li, Z.; Ma, Q.; Xu, J.; Liu, M.-Y.; Cui, Y.; Lin,
T.-Y.; Ma,W.-C.; Wang,S.; et al.2026. Sage: Scalableagentic
3d scene generation for embodied ai.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 22358–22368.
Xiang, F.; Qin, Y.; Mo, K.; Xia, Y.; Zhu, H.; Liu, F.; Liu, M.;
Jiang, H.; Yuan, Y.; Wang, H.; et al. 2020. Sapien: A sim-
ulated part-based interactive environment. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 11097–11107.
Yang, Y.; Jia, B.; Zhang, S.; and Huang, S. 2026a. Sce-
neweaver: All-in-one 3d scene synthesis with an extensible


and self-reflective agent. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 38: 140319–140351.
Yang, Y.; Luo, Z.; Gan, W.; Hao, J.; Lu, J.; Yan, J.; Lyu, Z.;
and Xu, X. 2026b. Code-as-Room: Generating 3D Rooms
from Top-Down View Images via Agentic Code Synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18451.
Yang, Y.; Sun, F.-Y.; Weihs, L.; VanderBilt, E.; Herrasti, A.;
Han, W.; Wu, J.; Haber, N.; Krishna, R.; Liu, L.; et al. 2024.
Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d embodied ai
environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 16227–16237.
Yin, S.; Ge, J.; Wang, Z. Z.; Wang, C.; Li, X.; Black, M. J.;
Darrell, T.; Kanazawa, A.; and Feng, H. 2026. Vision-as-
inverse-graphics agent via interleaved multimodal reasoning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11109.
Zhou, M.; Li, R.; Lyu, X.; Song, Z.; Huang, Z.; Zheng, C.;
Rupprecht, C.; Vedaldi, A.; and Wu, S. 2026. Articraft: An
agentic system for scalable articulated 3d asset generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15187.
Zhu, X.; Huang, X.; Xie, Q.; Deng, Z.; Yu, J.; Guan, Y.; Liu,
Z.; Zhu, L.; Zhao, Q.; Liu, L.; et al. 2025. Imaginarium:
Vision-guided High-Quality 3D Scene Layout Generation.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 44(6): 1–24.


Appendix
This appendix provides additional technical details, results,
and analyses of RoomWright. The contents are organized as
follows:
• A Evaluation Prompt Suite
• B Additional Results
• C Evaluation Metrics
• D Interactive Object Demonstrations
• E Editability of Code-Represented 3D Assets
• F Computational Cost Statistics
• G Limitation
A. Evaluation Prompt Suite
Our main evaluation uses a suite of 28 natural-language
scene prompts, reproduced verbatim below. The suite is
organized into three difficulty tiers—16 easy, 7 medium, and
5 hard prompts—and spans 23 distinct room types. This
section describes how the difficulty gradient and the room-
type coverage were designed, and then lists every prompt.
Difficulty gradient.
Difficulty is controlled along four axes
that stress progressively deeper stages of a scene-generation
pipeline:
• Mentioned-object count. Easy prompts name 2–4 an-
chor objects; medium prompts name 4–8; hard prompts
describe 15–20 entities, including small props (an alarm
clock, a glass of water, candlesticks) in addition to furni-
ture.
• Explicit cardinality. Medium and hard prompts intro-
duce counts that must be satisfied exactly (six chairs,
three bar stools, two rows of theater seats), which one-
shot layout methods frequently violate.
• Relational constraints. Easy prompts are flat object lists.
Medium prompts add a single spatial relation (an island
in the middle, a sideboard against the wall). Hard prompts
are paragraph-length and encode nested, chained relations
(a nightstand on each side of the bed, the left one holding
. . . , an armchair in the corner near the window with
a floor lamp beside it), requiring the layout solver to
compose many constraints consistently.
• Surface and wall clutter. On-surface props and wall-
mounted elements appear from the medium tier. The hard
tier additionally requires dense surface clutter and wall
decoration, exercising the on-surface and wall-mounting
stages at full load.
The five hard prompts are intentionally written as flowing
descriptive paragraphs rather than lists, so that object com-
pletion (recovering implied items), relation extraction, and
counting must all be inferred from natural language rather
than read off a template.
Room-type diversity.
The 28 prompts cover 23 room types
drawn from five functional categories: (i) core residential
rooms (bedroom, bathroom, kitchen, living room, dining
room, office, gym); (ii) utility spaces (laundry room, pantry,
mudroom, garage workshop); (iii) work and creative spaces
(art studio, music room, sewing room, photography studio,
home library); (iv) leisure spaces (home bar, wine cellar,
home theater, greenhouse sunroom, children’s playroom);
and (v) commercial interiors (dental exam room, barber-
shop). This mix tests generalization across both object vo-
cabularies (a dental chair shares little with a drum kit) and
layout conventions (row seating in a theater vs. radial seating
around a dining table).
Crucially, five room types—office, bedroom, bathroom,
dining room, and gym—appear in both the easy tier and
the hard tier. These form controlled within-type pairs (e.g.,
bathroom1 vs. bathroom2) in which the room category
and its core furniture are held fixed while the specification
complexity is scaled up, allowing difficulty effects to be mea-
sured independently of room-type effects. Scene identifiers
below follow this convention: a trailing 2 denotes the hard-
tier member of a duplicated type.
Easy prompts (16)
Table 3 lists the 16 easy-tier prompts verbatim.
Medium prompts (7)
Table 4 lists the 7 medium-tier prompts verbatim.
Hard prompts (5)
The five hard prompts are paragraph-length descriptions of
the five room types that also appear in the easy tier, enabling
the controlled within-type comparison described above.
office2 (open-plan office) A modern open-plan office
occupies the room, with a large L-shaped desk against
the window holding a dual-monitor setup, a wireless key-
board and mouse, a desk lamp, and a stack of documents
in a tray. An ergonomic mesh office chair sits in front of
the desk. Along the opposite wall stands a tall bookshelf
filled with binders and books, beside a black filing cabinet
with several drawers. A small round meeting table with
three chairs sits in one corner, with a potted plant nearby
for greenery. A whiteboard hangs on the wall above the
meeting table, and a wall clock is mounted near the door.
A patterned area rug anchors the seating area, and framed
certificates decorate the walls.
bedroom2 (adult bedroom) A cozy adult bedroom cen-
ters on a queen-size bed with a padded headboard against
the main wall, dressed with pillows and a folded blanket.
A nightstand stands on each side of the bed, the left one
holding a table lamp and an alarm clock, the right one
holding a book and a glass of water. Opposite the bed,
a wide wooden dresser with multiple drawers supports a
framed mirror and a small jewelry box. In the corner near
the window sits a comfortable armchair with a floor lamp
beside it for reading. A tall wardrobe provides storage
along the side wall, and a soft rectangular rug covers the
floor beside the bed. Framed artwork and a few hanging
plants decorate the walls.
bathroom2 (modern bathroom) A clean modern bath-
room features a white pedestal sink with a wall-mounted
mirror and a small shelf holding toiletries above it. Next
to the sink stands a tall storage cabinet stocked with folded


ID
Room type
Prompt (verbatim)
laundry_room
laundry room
A laundry room with a washing machine and a dryer.
bathroom1
bathroom
A bathroom with a vanity, a bathtub, and a toilet.
office1
home office
A home office with a desk, an office chair, and a bookshelf.
gym1
home gym
A home gym with a treadmill and an exercise bike, and a wall mirror.
library
home library
A home library with a bookshelf, a reading armchair, and a floor lamp.
art_studio
art studio
An art studio with an easel, a stool, and a worktable.
music_room
music room
A music room with a piano and a piano bench, and a drum kit.
home_bar
home bar
A home bar with a bar counter and three bar stools, and a wine rack.
sunroom
greenhouse sunroom
A greenhouse sunroom with a potting bench, plant stands, and a lounge chair.
wine_cellar
wine cellar
A wine cellar with wine racks, a tasting table, and four chairs.
photo_studio
photography studio
A photography studio with a backdrop, two studio lights, and a camera on a tripod.
sewing_room
sewing room
A sewing room with a worktable, a sewing machine, and a fabric shelf.
mudroom
mudroom
A mudroom with a bench, wall hooks, and a shoe cabinet.
pantry
pantry
A pantry with tall shelving units, a wire rack, and a narrow counter.
dental_office
dental exam room
A dental exam room with a dental chair, an overhead light, and a counter with a sink.
barbershop
barbershop
A barbershop with three barber chairs, a wall mirror, and a row of waiting chairs.
Table 3: The 16 easy-tier evaluation prompts (verbatim).
towels and bottles. A bathtub sits along the far wall with
a shower head above it and a glass shelf nearby holding
shampoo and soap. A toilet is placed in the corner with
a small toilet-paper holder mounted beside it. A laundry
hamper rests against the wall, and a bath mat lies on the
floor in front of the tub. Wall hooks hold hanging robes
and towels, and a small potted plant brightens the win-
dowsill.
dining_room2 (family dining room) A warm family
dining room is anchored by a large rectangular wooden
dining table surrounded by six matching upholstered
chairs. The table is set with plates, glasses, cutlery, and
a centerpiece vase of flowers. Against the wall stands a
wide sideboard buffet holding a stack of serving dishes,
a fruit bowl, and two candlesticks, with framed pictures
hanging above it. A glass-front display cabinet in the cor-
ner showcases fine china and wine glasses. A pendant
chandelier hangs above the center of the table, and a large
area rug defines the dining space underneath. A potted
plant sits near the window, and decorative artwork adorns
the walls.
gym2 (home gym) A well-equipped home gym fills the
room, with a treadmill positioned facing the mirror-
covered wall and a stationary exercise bike beside it. A
sturdy weight rack along one wall holds a row of dumb-
bells in increasing sizes, next to a flat workout bench.
A yoga mat is rolled out on the floor with a foam roller
and a stability ball nearby. A tall shelf stores folded tow-
els, water bottles, and resistance bands. A wall-mounted
clock and a motivational poster hang above the weight
rack, and a small storage cabinet in the corner holds extra
equipment. Rubber floor tiles cover the workout area for
grip and cushioning.
B. Additional Results
Figure 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 additionally show several rooms
of different types.
C. Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate each generated scene on ten metrics from Sce-
neEval, grouped into three families (Table 5). Unless noted
otherwise, every metric is reported as a fraction in [0, 1] and
higher is better; throughout, N denotes the number of objects
in the scene and Nspec the number of annotated requirements.
Following the paper, we report the three count-style metrics
(Collision, Out-of-Bound, Opening-Clearance) as satisfac-
tion ratios 1 −(violations/N) so that all ten columns share
the “higher is better” direction.
Physical plausibility (geometry)
Collision-free (COL).
Two objects are in collision if their
meshes interpenetrate. We use a two-stage check: a pairwise
penetration test, and—when an intersection is found—a per-
turbation re-check that nudges the object and repeats the test
to suppress touching-contact false positives. Let 1i indicate
that object i interpenetrates at least one other object. The
reported metric is the fraction of non-colliding objects,
COL = 1 −1
N
N
X
i=1
1i.
(5)
Navigability (NAV).
A top-down occupancy map of the
floor is computed: the floor polygon is rasterized, then
eroded by the robot footprint (width wrobot = 0.2 m), and
object bounding boxes (footprints) are subtracted. We run
connected-component analysis on the free (walkable) pix-
els and report the area of the largest connected free region
normalized by the total free area,
NAV =
 max CC(W)

|W|
,
(6)
where W is the walkable set after erosion and max CC is its
largest connected component. NAV = 1 when the walkable
space is a single connected region.


ID
Room type
Prompt (verbatim)
kitchen
kitchen
A kitchen with a counter along the main wall holding a microwave and a knife block, a
refrigerator at one end of the counter, and a built-in oven with a stovetop, with an island
in the middle with two bar stools tucked underneath.
bedroom1
bedroom
A bedroom with a queen bed against the main wall, a nightstand with a table lamp on
each side of the bed, a tall wardrobe with sliding doors, a low dresser with a wide mirror
above it, and a cushioned bench at the foot of the bed.
living_room
living room
A living room with a three-seat sofa facing a wall-mounted TV, a coffee table with a
stack of magazines on a wide area rug, a media console beneath the TV flanked by two
tall floor speakers, and a bookshelf along the side wall.
dining_room1
dining room
A dining room with a long rectangular table surrounded by six chairs and set with
tableware, a sideboard against the wall holding serving dishes, and a pendant chandelier
above the table.
garage_workshop
garage workshop
A garage workshop with a heavy workbench along the main wall fitted with a bench vise
and a toolbox, a tall pegboard above the bench holding hanging tools, a rolling tool chest
with drawers, and a metal shelving unit against the side wall.
playroom
children’s playroom
A children’s playroom with a low activity table with four small chairs, a tall toy shelf
filled with bins of toys, a cozy reading corner with a bean bag chair and a floor lamp,
and a play tent near the window.
home_theater
home theater
A home theater with a large projection screen on the main wall faced by two rows of
theater seats, a projector mounted on the ceiling, a low media console beneath the screen
flanked by two tall floor speakers, and a subwoofer in the corner.
Table 4: The 7 medium-tier evaluation prompts (verbatim).
In-bound (OOB).
For each object we sample k
=
max(1000, 5000 Vi) points on its surface (Vi = oriented
bounding-box volume) and cast a ray from each point in
the gravity direction g = (0, 0, −1). A point is out of bound
if its ray misses the room floor. With ri the in-bound point
ratio, object i is out of bound when ri < 0.99. The metric is
the fraction of in-bound objects,
ri = 1 −#{points of i whose ray misses floor}
k
,
(7)
OOB =
1
N
N
X
i=1
1[ ri ≥0.99 ]
(8)
Opening-clearance (OPC).
For every door/window we
extrude a clearance box into the room along the opening’s
inward normal and test for intersecting objects. An opening
is clear when no object interferes with its clearance volume.
The metric is the fraction of clear opening-direction checks,
OPC = #{opening checks with no interfering object}
#{opening checks}
.
(9)
VLM-judged physical correctness
Support (SUP).
A vision-language model first classifies
each object’s support type (ground / wall / ceiling / on-
object). Geometry then verifies the object is supported: it
is projected along the support’s gravity vector and we re-
quire a valid contact region whose centroid projection lies
inside the contact-point convex hull, within a distance thresh-
old τsup = 0.01 m of the supporting surface. The metric is
the fraction of correctly supported objects,
SUP =
1
N
N
X
i=1
1[ di ≤τsup ∧centroidi ∈Hulli ], (10)
where di is the min distance to the support surface and Hulli
is the contact-point convex hull.
Accessibility (ACC).
A VLM identifies each object’s func-
tional sides (e.g. the front of a chair, the opening of a cabinet).
For each functional side we cast rays from a ring around the
object toward it and measure the fraction that reaches the side
unblocked, giving a per-side score si,s ∈[0, 1]. An object’s
accessibility is its best side, ai = maxs si,s; objects with no
functional side are excluded. The metric is the mean over the
N ′ accessible objects,
ACC =
1
N ′
N′
X
i=1
max
s
si,s.
(11)
Prompt fidelity (spec satisfaction)
A shared set of requirement specifications is derived from
each prompt and a VLM-based object matcher first assigns
each scene object to the target categories (yielding per-
category groups C). Each metric below is the fraction of
its requirements that are satisfied,
Metric =
1
Nspec
Nspec
X
j=1
1[ requirement j holds ].
(12)
Object count (CNT).
Each requirement is (q, n, c): “the
scene should contain n objects of category c under quantifier
q” (q ∈{eq, lt, gt, le, ge}). It is satisfied when the matched
count #C[c] satisfies the comparison, e.g. for q = eq,
#C[c] = n.
Object attribute (ATR).
Each requirement is (q, n, c, a):
“at least/at most n objects of category c should exhibit at-
tribute a” (material, shape, color). A VLM inspects the ren-


dered images of each matched object in C[c] and the re-
quirement holds when the number of objects judged to have
attribute a satisfies the quantifier.
Object–object relationship (OO-Rel).
Each requirement
is (q, n, r, anchor, refs): “n target objects stand in relation r
to an anchor object.” The natural-language relation r (e.g.
around, next to, on top of) is mapped by a VLM to canonical
spatial types (inside_of, on_top, side_of, surround, face_to,
. . . ), then verified geometrically against object bounding
boxes and poses.
Object–architecture relationship (OA-Rel).
Each re-
quirement
is
(q, n, r, o, e):
“n
objects
o
stand
in
relation
r
to
an
architectural
element
e”
(e
∈
{wall, floor, ceiling, window, door}, e.g. a sideboard against
the wall, a chandelier hanging from the ceiling). Verified ge-
ometrically from the object and architecture bounding boxes.
D. Interactive Object Demonstrations
Complex interaction in our scenes is code-based: every in-
teraction is an explicit, machine-readable edge in a typed
control topology, and the same topology that drives asset
synthesis is executed verbatim at simulation time.
Interaction topology inference.
From the placed object
roster, a single LLM pass infers three coordinated structures.
Controllers are objects whose role is to initiate interaction
(wall switches, remotes, control panels). Part contracts de-
clare the interactive parts each object must physically possess
(buttons, knobs, displays, sensors); contracts are passed to the
articulation backend, so every contract part exists in the final
asset as a named URDF link with a proper joint — interaction
capability is built into the geometry, not asserted afterwards.
Typed edges wire controller parts to affected parts using an
obj#part addressing scheme:
Listing 1: A part-level edge. Cross-object edges use the iden-
tical schema with a different object id in target.
1
{
2
"source":
"obj_007#power_button",
3
"target":
"obj_007#display",
4
"relation": "activates",
5
"method":
"binary_switch",
6
"effect":
"screen",
7
"reason":
"The power button toggles
the microwave display and standby
state."
8
}
The
method
field
is
drawn
from
a
five-word
vocabulary
covering
how
control
is
applied
—
binary_switch,
multi_knob,
binary_knob,
binary_remote_button,
contact
—
while
effect names the affected channel: light, screen,
or state. Granularity is valve-controlled by the model:
complex appliances expose part-level edges (button →
display), while simple devices collapse to object-level
edges (switch →lamp). Note that the 23 scenes analyzed
here are those with easy and medium difficulty prompts;
harder prompts that demand denser or more unusual control
topologies are held out and not included in these statistics.
Figure 7 shows the resulting method × effect matrix. The
topology is typed but not degenerate: binary_switch
dominates as expected for household control, including
multi-state knobs driving screens and remote buttons driv-
ing state changes. The contact method (e.g. proximity-
triggered faucets) completes the picture of hands-free inter-
action.
Figure 8 breaks the same edges down by effect channel.
Nearly half of all interactions target a discrete state (a
door position, a program, a power state) rather than a lumi-
nous channel — evidence that the topology captures func-
tional, mechanism-level interaction and not just switch →
light wiring.
Finally, Figure 9 shows that relation is an open vo-
cabulary, not an enum: toggles and sets cover the com-
mon cases, but the long tail contains scene-specific verbs
that the model induces from context (opens (doors, lids),
dispenses (soap, towels), docks (charging), flushes,
fires). These verbs are informative for downstream con-
sumers: the runtime resolves an edge by its method/effect
pair, while the relation verb documents intent for search,
debugging, and human inspection.
Data-driven runtime.
The same JSON is executed by a
generic interpreter — no object category appears anywhere
in runtime code. Each asset ships a small manifest mapping
contract parts to simulator prims and each part’s effect to a
material or joint action; the manifest is generated from the
edge’s method/effect pair, not hand-written per object:
The interpreter loop is a few lines shared by every edge in
every scene:
Listing 3: The entire category-agnostic interpreter.
1
for edge in topology.edges:
2
src = resolve(edge.source)
# obj#part -> joint state
3
tgt = resolve(edge.target)
# obj#part -> prim + effect
bundle
4
if joint_travel(src) >= src.
press_threshold:
5
apply_effect(tgt, ON)
# else apply_effect(tgt, OFF)
Cross-object and part-level edges traverse the identical
code path, because addressing is object-scoped from the start:
a wall switch toggling a ceiling light and a button toggling its
own display differ only in the manifest entries their parts re-
solve to. Effects are material operations the simulator natively
supports (OmniPBR emissive toggling for screen/light
channels, with the off-state albedo dimmed so unlit screens
read correctly; joint articulation for state). Figure 10 shows
a gallery of the resulting interactive assets — each with its in-
teractive parts realized as named, jointed links — in textured,
untextured, and wireframe views. Finally, the architecture is
extensible rather than fixed: adding a novel interaction means
declaring a new edge, introducing new part contracts, method
or effect vocabulary, and a manifest entry, allowing arbitrar-
ily complex, user-defined control topologies to be layered
onto the same runtime.


Family
Metrics
What it measures
Physical plausibility
COL, NAV, OOB, OPC
realistic, walkable, in-room layout
VLM-judged physical
SUP, ACC
objects properly supported & reachable
Prompt fidelity
CNT, ATR, OO-Rel, OA-Rel
scene matches the text prompt
Table 5: The ten evaluation metrics and their families.
Listing 2: Per-asset runtime manifest for the microwave edge of Listing 1.
1
{"parts": {
2
"power_button": {"prim": "/World/microwave/power_button",
3
"joint": "body_to_power_button",
4
"press_threshold": 0.004},
5
"display":
{"prim": "/World/microwave/display",
6
"effect": {"channel": "screen",
7
"on":
{"emissive_strength": 1.0},
8
"off": {"emissive_strength": 0.0,
9
"albedo_dim": 0.15}}}}}
Figure 7: Method × effect distribution of the non-contact
interaction edges across 23 scenes.
E. Editability of Code-Represented 3D Assets
Every object RoomWright emits is a short program, not
an opaque mesh: parameters control global shape (car-
cass width/height/depth, panel thickness), and a handful of
typed, parametric parts (DrawerSlide, HingedDoor,
CabinetCarcass) are instantiated and placed by plain
code. This choice buys a property that mesh or point-cloud-
based scene generators structurally lack: editability. We ar-
gue that editability shows up at four levels, all of which are
exercised in our pipeline and in the accompanying asset li-
brary.
(1) Parametric edits: one template, a family of assets.
Because the asset is code, changing a few numbers yields
a structurally distinct object while every geometric consis-
tency rule is re-enforced by construction. As a demonstration,
a single drawer-cabinet template (Listing 4) produced a li-
brary of storage variants—vertical stacks, grids, and mixed
door+drawer layouts; eight of them are shown in Figure 11
and enumerated in Table 6. The rows×cols array and the
region splits are the only degrees of freedom that change;
Figure 8: Effect-channel share over all inferred edges.
drawer fitment inside the carcass (gaps, depth, slide travel)
is recomputed each time, so no edit can produce a drawer
that intersects its case. The equivalent edit on a generated
mesh would require re-modeling and re-rigging each variant
by hand.
(2) Semantic edits: parts stay physically valid.
Code-
level edits act on named, typed parts, so the asset’s functional
semantics survive editing. A DrawerSlide always com-
piles to a prismatic joint with the correct axis, parent, and
travel limit (default 0.9× depth); a HingedDoor always ro-
tates about its edge. Swapping a drawer for a door, mirroring
a hinge (left →right), or re-styling a handle is a one-line
change that cannot silently break the joint graph—the invari-
ants are locked in the part implementation, not delegated to
the generative model or the human editor. In contrast, editing
a mesh asset’s articulation means re-assigning joint frames
by hand, a well-known source of broken assets.
(3) State edits: posing is free.
Because articulation is ex-
plicit, any configuration state is obtained by writing joint


Layout parameters
Resulting asset
rows=2, cols=1
nightstand
rows=2, cols=3
wide dresser
double doors top + rows=2 bottom
cupboard with drawers
rows=1 top + door bottom
nightstand with cabinet
door column + rows=3 column
wardrobe with drawers
rows=3 column + door-over-drawer column
combo dresser
asymmetric split (2 wide + 3 narrow)
desk pedestal
door top + rows=2, cols=2 bottom
tall cupboard
Table 6: The eight cabinet variants shown in Figure 11, all generated from the single template of Listing 4. Each row is a
parameter change.
Figure 9: Most frequent induced relation verbs over the 194
edges.
values, not by re-generating geometry. From each cabinet’s
URDF we produced both the closed state and an open state
(drawers at 75% of travel, doors at 85% of their angular limit)
by simply setting q and re-evaluating the kinematics (Fig-
ure 11). This is precisely what downstream consumers need:
a physics simulator can play the same joint trajectories, and
a renderer can depict the same object in any pose—the mesh
baked at one configuration cannot.
(4) Text-level edits: diffable, reviewable, agent-editable.
Finally, a program is text. Variants are diffs, review is reading,
and the editing agent can be a human or an LLM: the model
that authors the asset can also revise it (“make the left column
a door instead”), recompile, and re-render in a closed loop.
Material and texture changes are equally cheap—the cabinet
library is re-skinned (oak albedo, white handles) without
touching geometry, since appearance is decoupled from the
code that defines shape and function.
Why this matters.
Scene generators that output meshes
entangle shape, articulation, and appearance into an opaque
artifact: any change costs a full re-generation with no guaran-
tee that structure is preserved. Code output makes the three
orthogonal—parameters reshape, joint values repose, mate-
rials reskin— which is what allows our pipeline to iterate:
completion can add objects, the critic can move them, and
users can customize assets, all without ever breaking the
Listing 4: One parametric template spans the whole variant
family. Only the layout lines differ between variants; part
invariants are enforced by the typed parts.
1
carcass = CabinetCarcass(width=0.9,
height=1.0, depth=0.45)
2
case = carcass.attach_to(m, name="case",
material=wood)
3
# grid: rows x cols drawers in region [
x0,x1]x[z0,z1]
4
add_drawers(xi0, xi1, zi0, zi1, rows=3,
cols=2, prefix="drawer")
5
# ... or a door: hinge edge x, height
range [z0,z1]
6
add_door(xi0 + gap, zsplit, zi1, width=
half, hinge="left", name="door_l")
functional contract each object carries.
F. Computational Cost Statistics
We report the computational cost statistics for the same batch
of evaluation runs used in our experiments. Object code is
generated with Claude Opus 4.8, whereas the overall scene
agent uses GPT-5.4. Table 7 summarizes token cost, and
Table 8 summarizes wall-clock runtime. The reported cost
covers both object code generation and the orchestration of
the overall scene agent.
Table 7: Token consumption statistics for the evaluation runs.
Cost item
Tokens (M)
Total token count
1,204.5
Average token count
43.0
Maximum token count
72.0
Minimum token count
27.2
Table 8: Wall-clock time cost statistics for the evaluation
runs, reported both in hours:minutes:seconds and seconds.
Statistic
Wall-clock time
Seconds
Average time cost
9:10:38
33,038.0 s
Maximum time cost
12:21:11
44,471.0 s
Minimum time cost
6:34:49
23,689.0 s


G. Limitation
As shown in Figure 12, objects that genuinely hang on hooks
involve complex mechanical simulation, and the generated
assets often lack suitable hanging structures. Moreover, our
assets do not yet support soft cloth physics. As a result, such
truly hanging objects cannot be realized in our scenes and
degrade into ordinary placements.


Figure 10: Demo of Objects with Complex Interactions


Figure 11: Parametric Editing of Code-Represented 3D Assets


Figure 12: Failure Cases in Generated Scenes.


Figure 13: A children’s playroom with a low activity table with four small chairs, a tall toy shelf filled with bins of toys, a cozy
reading corner with a bean bag chair and a floor lamp, and a play tent near the window.


Figure 14: A sewing room with a worktable, a sewing machine, and a fabric shelf.


Figure 15: A home library with a bookshelf, a reading armchair, and a floor lamp.


Figure 16: A photography studio with a backdrop, two studio lights, and a camera on a tripod.


Figure 17: A music room with a piano and a piano bench, and a drum kit.
