Title: Do programming languages still matter to your AI coding agent teammate? Evidence at scale from chess engines

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13763v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:06:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 72

Markdown Content:
Empirical Software Engineering manuscript No. 

(will be inserted by the editor) 

# Do programming languages still matter to your AI coding agent teammate? Evidence at scale from chess engines 

Mathieu Acher · Jean-Marc Jézéquel 

> Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Frontier coding agents promise to move software construction from line-level autocompletion to end-to-end authorship of complete software systems. Two empirical questions follow: do AI coding-agent teammates have the ability to program in any target programming language, including ones with no comparable prior open-source artefact. And if so, does the choice of language still shape the resulting artefact, and along which dimensions? We investigate both questions through a polyglot case study built around chess engines. Chess engines are non-trivial multi-component software systems and admit a hierarchy of language-agnostic oracles, ranging from exact move-generation correctness to a strength scale (Elo), that are observable whether the implementation language is Rust or Brainfuck, an esoteric language with 8 commands. We prompted two frontier coding agents ( Claude Code and Codex ,both run in high-reasoning mode) at the capability level i) without supplying chess knowledge or specific implementation guidance ii) under a documented, systematic intervention and stopping policy. Coding agents produced 34 agent-built chess engines spanning 17 primary programming languages , from mainstream to specialised, domain-specific, legacy, and esoteric targets. We combine a quantitative footprint (per-engine feature analysis, independent Elo assessment, session trajectories) with a qualitative analysis of source code and session transcripts, including a cross-language comparison of representative features (quiescence search, transposition table, evaluation function). Our results show that frontier coding agents are genuinely polyglot : every language we tried produced at least one feature-rich, working engine. For several of these engines we could not identify any prior open-source chess engine of comparable scope in the language, including technically demanding targets like L ATEX, while the COBOL engines go well beyond the language’s thin hobby precedent. Beyond raw coverage, agents now take on genuine software-engineering tasks end-to-end, and the code they ship is synthesised from scratch rather than copied. Even within this polyglot  

> Mathieu Acher Univ Rennes, IRISA, CNRS, Inria, IUF, France E-mail: mathieu.acher@irisa.fr Jean-Marc Jézéquel Univ Rennes, IRISA, CNRS, Inria, IUF, France E-mail: jean-marc.jezequel@irisa.fr
> arXiv:2606.13763v1 [cs.SE] 11 Jun 2026 2M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel

capability, we provide evidence that the choice of language still matters in three concrete ways. Strong playing strength is only reachable in mainstream compiled languages. Cost and software engineering effort grow sharply as the language becomes more exotic. The chess features the agent picks, and how it codes them, change from one language family to another. Agents also check their own work without being asked: they write correctness tests, play games against themselves, and estimate their playing strength on their own. That autonomy has limits, however. The self-estimates run too fast, and a few engines cheated by calling a chess library instead of implementing chess themselves. Our case study suggests that programming language is no longer about whether AI teammates can build a working system. It is now a choice about performance (strength), cost, what features get built and how, and how much humans still need to engineer the agent’s testing/benchmarking and check any cheating. 

Keywords coding agents · large language models · empirical software engineering ·

programming languages · chess engines · oracles · agentic software engineering 

1 Introduction 

> “Code itself will go away in favor of just making the binary directly.”
> – Elon Musk, public remark, 2025–2026 Musk (2026).

By integrating external tools, coding agents are redefining software development, transitioning the role of large language models (LLMs) from simple code completion to the end-to-end authorship of complete, functional, and performant systems. The claim quoted above, made by Elon Musk Musk (2026) and widely circulated through 2025–2026, captures a recurring view in the public discourse around this shift: that programming languages are an artefact of the human-in-the-loop era and will become obsolete once a sufficiently capable code-generating system arrives. With agents now routinely completing multi-hour software tasks at human-comparable reliability Kwa et al. (2026), the claim is no longer abstract but becomes a falsifiable empirical question: do programming languages (PLs) still matter to your AI coding-agent teammate? If yes, on which axes? If no, in which cases? And what does “mattering” mean once the agent, not a human, is the day-to-day implementer? The Empirical Software Engineering special issue “Agentic Software Engineering: The Rise of AI Teammates” , rooted in the SE 3.0 vision of autonomous coding agents acting as teammates rather than code-completion aids Li et al. (2025), asks exactly this kind of question: what does an AI teammate actually do when given a non-trivial software engineering (SE) task, and how should the empirical-SE community measure it? The existing polyglot-evaluation literature stops short of an end-to-end answer. Function-synthesis benchmarks (HumanEval Chen et al. (2021), MBPP Austin et al. (2021), MultiPL-E Cassano et al. (2023), HumanEval-XL Peng et al. (2024)) fix the language and limit the task to a single function or method. Issue-repair benchmarks (SWE-bench Jimenez et al. (2024), Multi-SWE-bench Zan et al. (2025), Aider Polyglot Gauthier (2024)) require an existing repository to localise patches against, and span only mainstream targets. A closest precedent for end-to-end agent-driven system construction is Carlini–Anthropic’s parallel-Claudes compiler Carlini and Anthropic (2026) that targets a single mainstream language (Rust), one large artefact, one agent team. None of these combines from-scratch system construction Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 3

with a language spectrum that crosses categories from mainstream general-purpose to truly esoteric. We do. Chess is unusually well-instrumented for this question. A working chess engine is a feature-rich software system spanning board representation, legal move generation, alpha–beta search, an evaluation function, transposition tables, Universal Chess Interface (uci ) protocol compliance to play games, etc. It is not a simple 8x8 matrix with some legal moves, but typically 500–5,000 lines that must compile, run, and produce correct results to be usable at all. Chess also admits a hierarchy of language-agnostic oracles : perft node counts give exact move-generation correctness, uci 

gameplay records give legal-move compliance verifiable by any compliant engine, and games against chess engines like Stockfish give a comparable strength estimate on the Elo scale (a common chess rating that summarises “how often does one player beat another” as a single number per player, see Section 2.3 for how to read it). A chess engine written in Brainfuck (an esoteric language with 8 commands) and a Rust engine can be measured on identical axes. Beyond measurability, building a chess engine is a software engineering task rather than a pure code-generation exercise. To reach a working engine, an agent must comprehend and revise its own code, keep the project building, test move generation against exact oracles, debug the failures those oracles expose, and benchmark the result through actual games. Our session data confirms this breadth empirically: implementation and code comprehension appear in every recovered session, and debugging, testing, benchmarking, and build tooling each appear in a majority of engines in every language category (Section 8.1). This combination of a non-trivial feature-rich target, language-agnostic external oracles, and broad programming-language coverage is precisely what existing agent benchmarks lack. Working from chess as the case study, the first author prompted two frontier coding agents, Claude Code (Anthropic Opus 4.6 /Opus 4.7 ) and Codex (OpenAI 

gpt-5-codex , gpt-5.3-codex , gpt-5.4 ), both run in high-reasoning mode, to construct chess engines across 17 primary programming languages. 1 The corpus contains 34 agent-built chess engines : 29 from-scratch main-corpus engines plus 5 special-role experiments (2 Java →language ports, 1 DSL-design experiment, 1 unconverged attempt, 1 agent-heavy co-design case). Thanks to this unique data (including generated code, session transcripts, and analysis), we address five research questions. Two are qualitative describing what the agents did. Three are quantitative 

measuring outcomes against external oracles or transcripts. 

– RQ1 (quantitative, coverage ). Can AI coding agent teammates produce a working chess engine in every programming language we attempt? Across which PL ×agent does a working chess engine emerge? 

– RQ2 (qualitative, synthesis & features ). What do the agents build, and is it a copy? Which feature sets are included per engine, how do agents adapt the same algorithm to different PLs, and is the code genuinely synthesised or memorised? 

– RQ3 (qualitative+quantitative, validation ). How do agent teammates demonstrate that their software is correct? Which oracles do they expose and implement (e.g.,   

> 1The 17 are counted over the 29 main-corpus from-scratch engines: Python, Java, C, C ++ ,Rust, Ruby, APL, Icon, Lean 4, Why3, Rocq, LaTeX/TeX, CSS/HTML, SQL, COBOL, x86-64 assembly, and Brainfuck. LaTeX/TeX and CSS/HTML are each counted once and the two OCaml-extracted formal targets (Why3, Rocq) separately. The special-role ports, the GAMBIT DSL experiment, and the underconverged Mojo session are excluded from the count. 4M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel

perft , uci , self-Elo rating), when in the session are they introduced, and are there any attempts to cheat , e.g., when the language constraint is relaxable through a library? 

– RQ4 (quantitative, strength ). Does the PL matter for playing strength? What playing strength (Elo) do the engines reach under a unified re-evaluation harness, and how do throughput, feature richness, and category track Elo? 

– RQ5 (quantitative, cost & effort ). Does the PL matter for cost and effort? How many prompts, tokens, and dollars does a working engine cost? What fraction of the session is, e.g., debugging, and how does the breadth and intensity of software engineering activities the agent exercises differ across PL categories? 

RQ1 establishes the existence half of our answer: all 17 target languages can 

host an agent-built engine. RQ4 and RQ5 establish the impact half: PLs matter for ceiling Elo, for cost, for the breadth and intensity of software engineering work the agent has to do. RQ2 and RQ3 are the qualitative observations that make the quantitative answers interpretable: we identify and characterise what was built, how 

it was synthesised across languages, and how the agents demonstrated correctness to themselves and to us. Before digging into the RQs, including the title question itself, it is worth high-lighting an important result: frontier coding agents now build complete chess engines in multiple, diverse PLs. This is a polyglot tour de force . The agents did not stop at familiar PLs such as C, Java, Python, or Rust (and even in such cases, agents did not generate pure copies, see hereafter). They also produced working engines in targets where chess is a challenging fit: pure TeX, where data structures and control flow have to be encoded through macros, or COBOL, a legacy PL rarely associated with advanced game-tree search. For pure CSS, pure-TeX, APL, Icon, Lean 4, Why3/Rocq, and Brainfuck we could not identify any previously reported open-source chess engine of comparable scope, and the corpus’s x86-64 assembly engine has no comparable open-source uci predecessor we could find (we scope that claim against older assembly prior art in Section 4). This is more than a larger multilingual benchmark. Prior polyglot evaluations mostly ask for functions, patches, or edits Chen et al. (2021); Cassano et al. (2023); Jimenez et al. (2024); Zan et al. (2025). Here the agents build complete systems from scratch, without specific technical guidance or interventions about architecture or chess knowledge. That is a capability shift: frontier coding agents can now carry feature-rich system construction into PLs that were previously unsupported by public examples, poorly suited to the task, or both. That shift refines the title question. Once agents can make even LaTeX, COBOL, and Brainfuck work, the important question is no longer only whether a PL can host the system. It is what the PL changes once the system exists. Our evidence-based answer is as follows: Yes, programming languages still matter to your AI coding agent teammate . Specifically, PLs set a ceiling on playing strength (Elo rating): the 1900 Elo–2100 Elo band is mainstream-compiled only PLs. Specialised, domain-specific, legacy, and esoteric engines plateau hundreds to thousands of Elo below. PLs also multiply cost and effort . A typical mainstream first-pass engine takes a handful of prompts and an estimated ∼$2 –$30 of canonical USD (Section 3.2). Engines in the harder PL categories take ∼25–50 prompts at an estimated ∼$60 –$480, with debug-prompt fractions above 0.4 and broader SE activity from the agent. PL choice therefore no longer answers only “can the agent make this language work?” It answers “how strong, how expensive, and with how much SE work?”. Once every Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 5

language we attempted is reachable and a candidate, choosing one becomes a first-class engineering decision rather than a bottleneck check. What matters when choosing a programming language for an AI-teammate-built system? The corpus suggests at least four axes that move with PL category in this domain: the strength ceiling the language allows, the cost multiplier on the agent’s session, the breadth of SE activities the agent has to exercise, and the kind of features and verification the language affords. We do not turn this into a fully predictive model, but we lay out the evidence across RQ2 –RQ5 .Another result, which we treat as one of the paper’s contributions (even though it is, in part, a negative one), concerns Elo rating self-evaluation . The agents wire up their own strength procedures autonomously (Section 6), but the in-loop self-Elo signal they optimise against is biased 200 Elo–1100 Elo above the external Elo assessment, with extreme cases up to 1078 Elo of overestimation. To put those numbers in scale: at a 200 Elo overestimate the favourite-to-win prediction has already flipped, and the 1000 Elo+ cases describe engines that lose essentially every game but report themselves as credible opponents. This matters because the agent uses the same signal to decide whether a code change helped and when to stop iterating, so the bias pushes the agent to declare success too early. The cause is the benchmarking setup the agents converge to on their own: they run too few games per opponent for the estimate to stabilise, and at time controls too short to let their alpha–beta search reach reliable depth. The implication for AI-teammate practice is direct: agents are capable of validation, but precise and trustable Elo benchmarking still requires more human guidance than current sessions get. There is also the risk that agents cheat by implementing the software system in another PL or reusing a library. It sits at the interface between RQ3 (validation) and RQ4 (strength) and is easy to miss inside either one alone. Our work is an exploratory empirical field study. We observe and characterise. We do not causally explain. We carefully separate what we directly observe from what we describe but do not causally attribute. Existence proofs and synthesis evidence rest on direct observation. PL-vs-strength and PL-vs-cost tendencies are descriptive: six entangled confounders (model mastery of the language, session stochasticity, computational platform, budget, benchmarking strategy, and feature–PL correlation) prevent any causal language ranking. 2

Contributions. Our contributions are as follows: 

– Polyglot, end-to-end system construction as a frontier-agent capability shift. 34 agent-built feature-rich chess engines (29 main-corpus + 5 special-role) across 17 programming languages spanning five categories. Every PL we tried produced at least one working engine: a feasibility result not reported in the prior literature, plausibly because the previous generation of LLMs could not make it. No prior study combines from-scratch system construction with a language spectrum reaching strictly esoteric and previously non-implemented targets (Section 10). 

– First-of-kind agent-built engines in PLs without prior chess engines of comparable scope. The corpus contains, to our knowledge, the first chess engines of comparable scope ever produced in pure-TeX, APL, Icon, Lean 4, and Why3/Rocq, plus Brainfuck and the COBOL targets that have only thin hobby   

> 2The confounders are catalogued in Section 9. We treat them as a contribution rather than an apology: they specify exactly what a follow-up controlled experiment must hold fixed. 6M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel

precedent, and an x86-64 assembly uci engine without a comparable open-source predecessor we could identify. We treat these as a contribution in their own right: they show that AI coding-agent teammates can master even unsuited or under-resourced PLs, and they reframe the empirical-SE question from “which PLs are reachable?” (in this corpus: all attempted) to “what matters when choosing a PL once every candidate is reachable?” . It is the follow-up question that motivates the rest of the paper. 

– An empirical answer to “do PLs still matter?”. With existence ( RQ1 ), strength ( RQ4 ), and cost/effort ( RQ5 ) decomposed against language category, agent, feature set, and oracle rigor, we provide the first measurable statement of 

which dimensions of “mattering” an AI teammate alters and which it does not, on the chess-engine domain. This answer runs counter to the code-obsolescence claim quoted at the start of the paper: even for AI teammates, the choice of programming language continues to shape outcomes. 

– A qualitative analysis of agent code synthesis across PLs. A pattern feature catalog and a Chess Engine Feature Explorer web tool (Section B.5) that browses variants sub-feature by sub-feature. The recurring pattern is that agents reproduce the same conceptual blueprint in every language but adapt its structure to the target PL’s idiom and make markedly different sub-feature choices from one variant to the next. 

– A characterisation of agent validation behaviour in the wild. Oracle-first iteration as a property of coding agents with evidence that self-Elo benchmarking can go wrong (and how it can be fixed) as well as cheating attempts under language constraints. It has implications for any developers, researchers, or agent harness intended to enforce a domain constraint. 

– A unified re-evaluation harness (Docker images of every engine, a calibrated anchor ladder of five external references, and a round-robin runner) producing a single directly-comparable Elo per engine, plus the original in-tree PGN-derived numbers as historical context. 

– A reproducible analysis pipeline that ingests Claude Code and Codex 

session transcripts, computes repository and interaction statistics, extracts chess-specific features over a catalog, executes games’ tournaments, and produces every table and figure the paper reports. We also shared all source code and data of the 34 engines in dedicated repositories. 

– A research agenda naming six confounders that jointly prevent causal language-effectiveness claims in any observational study of this form, and specifying exactly what a follow-up controlled experiment must hold fixed. 

Remainder of the paper. Section 2 introduces coding agents and chess-engine anatomy. Section 3 describes the corpus and method. The five RQs follow: RQ1 coverage (Section 4), RQ2 synthesis and features (Section 5), RQ3 validation (Section 6), RQ4 

strength (Section 7), and RQ5 cost and effort (Section 8). Section 9 and Section 10 follow, and Section 11 discusses the findings, concludes, and lays out future work. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 7

2 Background 

2.1 Frontier coding agents We use “frontier coding agents” to mean interactive, tool-using LLM-powered systems that operate on a developer’s local repository. The two agents in our corpus are 

Claude Code (Anthropic) and Codex (OpenAI). Both run a loop of plan → tool use (shell, file edits, reads) → reflect , persist a transcript of every turn, and can invoke subagents for parallel exploration. In our corpus we observe two model families: Anthropic’s Opus 4.6 and Opus 4.7 , and OpenAI’s gpt-5-codex , gpt-5.3-codex ,and gpt-5.4 . Both agents were run in high-reasoning mode throughout ( Claude Code ’s extended-thinking budget enabled and Codex with its reasoning=high 

setting) so that the comparison is between each frontier agent at its strongest configuration. Both agents are fast-evolving commercial products, so we record their configuration at the level the products expose. Codex embeds the CLI version in every session header, and the corpus sessions span versions 0.98.0 through 0.118.0. The released derived snapshot does not record the Claude Code CLI version, so we do not report a version range for the Claude Code sessions. Neither product exposes decoding parameters such as temperature or random seeds, so all sessions ran at vendor-default sampling settings, and an individual session cannot be replayed exactly. Per-session timestamps are preserved in the released data snapshot. A session is a sustained developer–agent conversation that produces one engine (or fails trying). Both agents log every session as a structured transcript. Each entry carries a timestamp, the model used, token usage, and either a developer message, the agent’s reasoning and output, or a tool invocation with its result. 2.2 Chess-engine anatomy A standard chess engine is a pipeline of well-defined components CPW: 

– Board representation. Common choices: mailbox (8 ×8 or 0 ×88), bitboards (64-bit masks per piece), or higher-level object models. 

– Move generation. Pseudo-legal moves per piece, a legality filter (king-in-check), and handling of special moves: castling, en passant, pawn promotion. 

– Evaluation. Minimally material, typically extended with piece-square tables, tapered mid/endgame scoring, pawn-structure terms, king safety. 

– Search. Negamax or minimax with alpha–beta pruning, iterative deepening, quiescence, move ordering (MVV-LVA, killer moves, history heuristic), and trans-position tables keyed by a Zobrist hash. More advanced engines add null-move pruning and late-move reductions. 

– Protocols. uci is the de facto protocol to play games against other engines. pgn 

is the game-record format used for measuring strength. 2.3 An oracle hierarchy Chess provides three layered oracles that are themselves encoded in code or data, and that an agent can drive autonomously: 8 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

1. perft . Deterministic node counts of the move-generation tree at fixed depth from a fixed position. The reference values (up to depth 7) are published on the Chess Programming Wiki and admit exact comparison. Passing perft is strong evidence that move generation is correct. 2. Gameplay. An engine that speaks uci can play a reference engine (typically 

Stockfish ) and produce pgn records. Legal-move compliance is checkable me-chanically: the record either is or is not a valid chess game. 3. Elo rating. Against a calibrated opponent (e.g. Stockfish with UCI_Lim-itStrength =true and UCI_Elo =R), observing score s over N games yields an Elo estimate via the logistic ∆ = −400 log 10 ( 1 

> s

− 1) with standard error 

SE (∆) ≈ 400 ln 10 ·√N ·s(1 −s) . Aggregating across opponents via inverse-variance weighting gives a confidence interval that shrinks with N .These three levels map onto three properties familiar from SE testing: func-tional correctness against a fixed reference suite (perft is a harsh, exhaustive specification-conformance check), functional correctness across diverse opera-tional scenarios (every gameplay record either parses as a valid chess game or does not, across as many distinct game situations as the engine plays), and performance 

(Elo grades how well the engine plays on a cardinal, cross-engine scale). We use all three to characterise the agents’ validation behaviour ( RQ3 ) and to assess playing strength ( RQ4 ). 

How to read an Elo number. Elo is a way to put “how good is this player?” into a single number. If player A has 100 more Elo than player B, A is expected to win roughly two games out of three in the long run (200 more is about three out of four, and 400 more is about ten out of eleven). The numbers come from games actually played: beating a stronger opponent moves your rating up, losing to a weaker one moves it down, by an amount that depends on how surprising the result was. Two practical points follow that will matter when we read Elo numbers later in the paper. First, an Elo number is learned from a particular community of players, and only that community calibrates it: the engine-vs-engine ladders (CCRL, CEGT), the FIDE human pool, and the 

Stockfish gauntlets the agents run themselves are three different communities that happen to use the same units, so an 1800 Elo learned against one is not directly the same kind of 1800 Elo as one learned against another. Second, “ Stockfish ” is not one opponent but a family: with UCI_LimitStrength=true and UCI_Elo= R it plays at approximately R Elo, so two gauntlets that both say “we played Stockfish ” can in fact be against very different opponents depending on the target strength chosen. Our re-evaluation harness (Section 7) handles both points the same way: every corpus engine plays the same fixed panel of opponents (Rustic at 1820 Elo, Asymptote at 2150 Elo, and Stockfish at Skill 5/10/15) at the same time control, so the Elo numbers we report in the External Elo Assessment column of Table 6 are on one consistent yardstick rather than on whichever one each agent happened to pick. 

3 Corpus and method 

3.1 Corpus acquisition and interaction protocol All projects in the corpus were created by the first author on a single developer workstation over a period of about two and a half months (2026-02 to 2026-04), each Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 9

as a deliberate exercise in “can agent A build a chess engine in language L?”. No project was created to pass a fixed benchmark. Each was a naturalistic attempt to exercise the agents. We followed a single interaction protocol across every engine. The procedure has three phases (initial capability prompt → minimal in-loop steering → stop-rule). Figure 1 renders it as a flowchart. The human role is intentionally restricted to capability-level steering, error reporting, and evaluation invocation (if needs be). Named-feature or named-algorithm prompts are excluded. We verified a posteriori 

that the prompting process of Figure 1 was followed across the 24 engines with recoverable prompt streams, over 374 follow-up prompts. The audit script and the per-prompt classification are released with the replication artefact. The handful of regex-flagged prompts are all the agent’s own roadmap echoed back by the user, port sessions naming parent-engine features by design, or regex artefacts. 

Three phases, expanded. Most sessions opened with one short, language-parametric template (reproduced in Figure 1’s top box). It is deliberately open-ended on archi-tecture (no instruction about search, eval, or representation) and names an evaluation goal but not a method . A small number of sessions used alternative entry points where the canonical template was a poor fit, most notably the two Java →language ports, where the agent was given an existing implementation to translate rather than asked to build from scratch. During the session itself, the human installed missing tools, resolved environment issues, and explained agent errors, but did not propose algorithms, data structures, or evaluation strategies unless the agent explicitly asked. Capability-level nudges (“improve the Elo”) are in scope. Code-level prescriptions (“use bitboards”) are out. A session ended when Elo stabilised, when improvement stalled, or when the engine could play end-to-end games against Stockfish . No uniform budget cap per engine was imposed. 3.2 Evidence sources and analysis For each engine we combine four evidence sources: the repository contents (source files, tests, build artefacts, PGN records, documentation), the git history where available, the Claude Code session transcripts (one JSONL per session, plus subagent transcripts), and the Codex session transcripts (per-day JSONL rollouts, filtered to each project by working-directory match). These raw inputs are reduced by a Python extraction pipeline into six per-engine derivatives, each chosen because it underwrites a specific downstream research question rather than for its own sake. The first is size and language mix , that is, LOC and file counts by language, so that engines built in PLs with very different baseline verbosity remain comparable. This is the precondition for any cross-language claim in RQ1 

and RQ5 . The second is a feature fingerprint : for each of 38 canonical chess-engine features (board representation, move generation, quiescence search, transposition table, evaluation, and so on) curated from the established Chess Programming Wiki 

(CPW) CPW taxonomy, the pipeline records a yes/no indicator of whether the engine contains that feature. This compact representation is what lets us ask in RQ2 which capabilities each agent reached for and which it skipped, without privileging any one author’s mental model of what a chess engine should contain. The third is a 10 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel Initial capability prompt ( c1 ): “I want to build a chess engine in [LANG]. At the end I want to test it and assess its Elo rating against engines of similar levels.” Agent autonomously plans, codes, builds, de-bugs, and validates (oracle stack: parser → legal-ity → perft → self-play → Stockfish gauntlet). Build/test fails? Paste the failure verbatim, no fix prescription ( p3 ). Engine plays legal games? Ask for missing infras-tructure: UCI loop, perft, FEN parser ( p5 ). Elo measured? Ask for a gauntlet vs. 

Stockfish /cutechess ( p2 ). Elo plateau or budget hit? “Continue / improve the Elo”, with no algorithm names ( p1 ). Stop session. Record final Elo, transcripts, code. yes no no yes no yes no yes 

Fig. 1 Interaction protocol applied to every main-corpus engine. The human’s role is restricted to four follow-up prompt classes: p1 capability-level steering, p2 eval invocation, p3 bug/failure report (verbatim, no fix prescription), and p5 validation infrastructure. The audit taxonomy also defines p4 , the protocol-deviating class (named-algorithm or named-feature prompts), which the protocol forbids and the a posteriori audit found absent. The human never names a specific chess or SE algorithm or feature in their prompts. Those choices are left entirely to the agent. Stop-rule: the session ends when the engine plays legal games, has a measured Elo, and the agent’s improvement attempts have plateaued under a reasonable budget. We did not push for 2800 Elo-style targets (Section 11.2). 

session ledger of prompts, agent turns, tool uses, token counts, and a per-engine cost estimate. This is the substrate that makes RQ5 ’s effort and cost analysis possible at all, since the same engine can be cheap or expensive depending on how many oracle-failure loops the agent had to traverse. The fourth is a prompt-derived backlog ,split into a user-driven part ( bl-) and an agent-centric step-wise part ( sb-) extracted from session prompts. This split is what lets RQ3 separate what the user asked for from what the agent chose to do on its own, the central autonomy claim of the paper. The fifth is the gameplay record , a pgn /perft index with Elo estimates against calibrated opponents, which is the only direct evidence we have of how well the engine actually plays and is used throughout RQ4 . The sixth is a novelty audit built from four independent signals (manifest dependencies, source imports, canonical-engine Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 11 

fingerprints, transcript authorship claims) that flag whether an engine was written from scratch or quietly leans on a chess library. The audit is the central evasion check for RQ2 and RQ3 , since a capable agent can satisfy the user’s literal request while side-stepping its spirit (Section 6.3). Alongside the quantitative pipeline we also produced in-depth qualitative case-studies of selected engines, written up as standalone narratives that walk through a session step by step (notably the TeX-based engine and the Brainfuck engine Acher (2026b,a)). These case-studies give a textured, episode-by-episode picture that com-plements the aggregate metrics, surface anomalies the pipeline cannot label on its own, and serve as a sanity check on the corpus-wide claims. 

Cost reporting: canonical vs. vendor list-price. USD figures invoiced by the two agent vendors are not directly comparable: Anthropic’s Claude Code sessions benefit from a sharp cache-read discount that dominates long-context-cache-heavy runs, whereas 

Codex sessions are billed primarily at standard input rates. Reporting either vendor’s invoice across the corpus would silently penalise or favour one of them. We therefore report a single canonical cost per engine, computed uniformly from the observed token volumes at a fixed reference rate ( $1 per million input tokens, $5 per million output tokens, ignoring vendor-specific cache discounts). The column appears as 

Norm. USD in Table 1. The per-vendor list-price USD that each agent vendor would have invoiced is preserved in the replication artefact ( reports/usd-by-vendor.csv )for transparency. Both forms are list-price (no account discounts). Cross-vendor effort claims throughout the paper are anchored on either canonical USD or token volume, never on list-price USD. 

LLM-assisted analysis, code first. The meta-analysis itself was conducted with LLM assistance, mainly Claude Code , and we declare that usage in line with the community guidelines for empirical studies involving LLMs (Baltes et al., 2025). The division of labour is deliberately code-first. Every quantitative figure in the paper is computed by deterministic Python scripts over the released transcripts, repositories, and game records, never by an LLM reading those artefacts. LLM assistance went into writing that code, drafting the per-engine reports and qualitative narratives under an evidence-citation discipline, and editing the manuscript, always under author review. Section G details the LLM and author roles for each analysis task, and Section H self-assesses the paper against the accompanying reporting checklist. 3.3 Feature-level cross-engine analysis The file-level feature scan ( RQ2 ) records, for each of 38 canonical chess-engine features, whether the engine in question contains that feature. The answer is a yes/no value obtained by searching the project for the presence of patterns associated with the feature (e.g. quiescence , qsearch , or related identifiers for the quiescence-search feature). The catalog of 38 features was curated by the first author from the Chess Programming Wiki (CPW) CPW, the de facto reference taxonomy for chess-engine internals. The question we ask of each engine is therefore not “did the agent invent the right concepts?” but “did it implement the concepts the chess-engine community already agrees on?”. 12 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

A yes/no presence indicator is informative for coverage but tells us little about 

depth : which sub-options were taken inside each feature, how the algorithm was adapted to the target language, and whether two engines that both check the box for “transposition table” are in fact implementing similar things. To move from presence to depth we built a second pipeline that, for each of three representative features chosen to span the major component types of a chess engine (quiescence search as a search algorithm, transposition table as a data structure, and evaluation as an evaluation function), extracts the per-engine hotspot , that is, the function body that implements the feature in each variant. Inside the hotspot, around a dozen sub-feature checks per feature look for specific, algorithmically meaningful design choices (delta pruning inside quiescence, the transposition-table replacement scheme, mid-/end-game tapering inside evaluation, and so on), all drawn from the same Chess Programming Wiki taxonomy so the per-feature analysis stays grounded in established chess-engine vocabulary rather than in the analyst’s choice of keywords. Because regex-driven extraction can be inaccurate on unusual languages or hand-rolled idioms, we triangulate the algorithmic pipeline three ways. First, the catalog itself is expert-curated : the 38-feature list and the sub-feature checks were authored and revised by the first author against the chess-programming reference, not auto-generated. Second, for each of the three case-study features we hand-audited every per-variant extraction : where the algorithmic pipeline returned a suspicious result, we read the source ourselves and corrected the verdict, so the final per-variant verdicts reflect qualitative judgement informed by the algorithmic baseline rather than the algorithmic baseline alone. Third, we built a Chess Engine Feature Explorer , a small tool that lets a reader browse one feature at a time across all engines, view the extracted hotspot side by side, and inspect pairwise distances between variants (a lexical similarity over normalised tokens and an algorithmic similarity over the sub-feature presence vector). 3.4 SE-activity coding frame Beyond “what did the agent build?”, the session transcripts let us ask what did the agent do to build it? . We therefore developed a second coding frame, orthogonal to the feature scan, that tags every step of the session with the software-engineering activities it exhibits. Throughout the paper, a step is one user prompt together with all the agent work that follows it, up to the next user prompt. Step counts are computed over the full recoverable trajectory record, which is a different accounting from the prompt counts of Table 1: the cost columns exclude post-mortem analysis sessions, while engines whose main transcripts were compacted retain only subagent records, so per-engine step and prompt counts can differ in either direction. The 10 activity categories were induced bottom-up from the trajectory data rather than imposed a priori from a generic SE textbook. The resulting frame is itself one of the paper’s reusable contributions, naming the SE work that is empirically observable in frontier-agent chess-engine sessions. Each engine is summarised as a 10-dimensional intensity profile using a 4-level Likert scale (absent, light, moderate, heavy) on the share of the session tagged with each capability. Both the 10-category frame and the per-step tagging rules that map a session step to a category were developed iteratively. A first 13-category draft was tested against a stratified sample of sessions and then pruned: pairs of categories that proved indistinguishable in practice (for example Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 13 

refactoring vs. implementation, since most agent “refactors” were file-edit sequences inside ongoing implementation) were merged, until the 10 categories the paper uses remained. The tagging rule for each category is a small deterministic predicate over the structured per-step record (filename touched, tool used, bash command issued, vocabulary of the user’s prompt), so a session can be re-coded by anyone with access to the same trajectory data. 3.5 Qualitative supervision against agent cheating A capable agent can satisfy a user’s literal request while side-stepping its spirit, i.e., it is cheating. The canonical case in the corpus is chess-css-codex , a CSS-styled chess engine whose early drafts silently imported python-chess to do the actual chess work (more details in Section 6.3). To guard against this we apply a four-step qualitative supervision protocol on every engine: read the engine-core diff, grep for chess-library imports, verify that the oracle the engine is tested against is independent of the engine under evaluation, and redirect the session when evasion is detected. 3.6 Canonical re-evaluation: a cross-PL chess-engine evaluation platform A central methodological concern underlies this paper: when an agent self-reports that “my engine reaches Elo X against Stockfish ”, how should we read that number? Each session ran its own self-administered evaluation under its own protocol (different time controls, different opponent ladders, different game counts). The Elo numbers are not directly comparable across engines and are not directly comparable to public engine ratings either. Worse, those numbers are the same ones the agent itself optimised against, so they inherit whatever bias the agent’s chosen setup carries. There is also the risk that agents overestimate their own performance (e.g., on purpose and thus it can be seen as a form of cheating). We therefore engineered an agent-independent evaluation platform: a canonical re-evaluation harness in which every engine in the corpus plays against the same fixed opponents, at the same time control, with the same opening book and the same adjudication rules. Concretely, every engine is matched against Stockfish 

at a calibrated ladder of strengths ( UCI_Elo from 800 to 2600 in steps of 200) at TC=120+1, against a fixed 20-position opening book, and is additionally compared to a five-engine cross-vendor reference panel (Rustic, Asymptote, and Stockfish at three Skill levels) whose own ratings are independently calibrated. Section 7 reports the resulting external Elo assessment for every engine. Two engineering points are worth naming. First, this evaluation infrastructure is the only thing in the paper that makes cross-PL strength claims defensible: without it, comparing a CSS engine’s self-claimed 1800 Elo against a Rust engine’s self-claimed 1800 Elo would be a comparison of two different rulers, with no way to tell which one is rescaled, which is biased, or which is honest. Second, when the canonical number diverges substantially from an engine’s session-internal self-Elo, the gap is a finding, not noise (Sections 6 and 7). 14 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

4 RQ1 (Coverage): every attempted programming language can be mastered 

Question. Across which programming languages and coding agents can frontier agents produce a working chess engine? Is there a PL category that resists agent-built construction at this scale? The Musk-style claim that “code goes away” collapses, in software-engineering terms, to a single empirical test: is there a programming language a sufficiently capable agent cannot master? If any PL still resists, the agent loop is not a polyglot system-construction tool, only a polyglot synthesiser of small artefacts Cassano et al. (2023); Peng et al. (2024); Jimenez et al. (2024); Zan et al. (2025); Gauthier (2024). The chess corpus does test it, and the answer is consequential: with frontier coding agents, no language category in our taxonomy is empty. Several experiments in fact contain the first open-source chess engine ever reported in that target. It should be noted that each engine is its own data point: we do not group sessions by language, because two sessions in the same language can produce substantively different engines. 

Language taxonomy. We organise the corpus into five categories: mainstream general-purpose (Python, Java, C, C ++ , Rust, Ruby, Mojo), specialised / aca-demic (APL, Icon, Lean, OCaml, Why3, Rocq: real general-purpose or formal-methods languages), domain-specific / markup (LaTeX/TeX, CSS/HTML, SQL), 

legacy (COBOL, Assembly), and esoteric / constrained-execution-model (Brain-fuck). Table 1 lists 34 agent-built engines spanning five language categories, with both frontier agents ( Claude Code and Codex ) present across all five (multiple engines in mainstream, specialised, domain-specific, and legacy, and one shared language, Brainfuck, in the esoteric category, where the Codex engine only partially meets the pure-Brainfuck constraint, see below). 

Special-role experiments. Beyond the main corpus, five engines follow protocols different enough to warrant separate treatment. In two Java →language ports (chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex , chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex ), the agent was given an existing Java reference engine to translate rather than asked to build from scratch. In a DSL-design experiment ( chess-newlang-codex ), the agent designs the GAMBIT DSL and its C ++ transpiler before writing the engine. An underconverged case ( chess-mojo ) produced a working but very weak engine that we keep separate from main-corpus aggregates. Finally, an agent-heavy co-design case ( test-superset , ChessCSS), built under sustained expert steering, is discussed as the positive counterexample to the CSS evasion in Section 6.3. The bottom block of Table 1 gives their metadata. We cite each where it bears on a specific RQ rather than dedicate a standalone section to them. 

Size patterns by language category. Repository size (LOC) is informative because it tracks how much code a category needs to express the same chess-engine capabilities. Mainstream general-purpose engines cluster tightly in the 2–12 kLOC band. The legacy row (COBOL, Assembly) reaches 10–120 kLOC because each primitive does less work per line and because derived C and build artefacts inflate the count. Brainfuck takes a different shape again: roughly 5–10 kLOC of Python code-generator that compiles to ≈5.6 MB of BF. Four repositories exceed 40 kLOC. Two of them are Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 15 

Table 1 The 34 agent-built chess engines in scope, with metadata ( RQ1 : role, language, primary-developer agent, files, LOC) and effort columns ( RQ5 : prompts, input/output tokens, both forms of USD). Role : main = from-scratch construction (29 engines, the population for 

RQ1 –RQ5 ), port = Codex translation of the chess-java-cc reference engine into another target language, DSL = the agent designs a new chess-engine DSL and its C ++ transpiler, 

co-design = pure-CSS engine built under sustained expert steering, and underconverged = a working but very weak engine that did not reach competitive playing strength within the session budget. Primary agent is the agent whose session(s) authored the engine source. Rows marked 

♭ also have secondary-agent sessions in the repository that we classify as post-mortem analysis 

(no engine-core writes, analysis vocabulary in the first prompt) and exclude from the prompt, token, and cost aggregates per Section 3.2. The recomputed columns reported here strip those contributions. In/Out (kTok) = thousands of input (incl. cache-read and cache-creation) and output tokens. Norm. USD is a canonical reference cost computed uniformly across the corpus at $1 /MTok input + $5 /MTok output, ignoring vendor-specific cache discounts. It is 

intra-corpus comparable by construction and is the form the body uses for cross-engine claims. 

List USD is the vendor’s own list-price estimate (Anthropic for Claude Code , OpenAI for 

Codex ). We report it for situational interpretability (e.g., what a developer would actually be invoiced) but it is not cross-vendor comparable, since Anthropic cache-read rates and OpenAI standard-input rates do not align. n/a = main session transcripts compacted by Claude Code 

before capture. The source on disk plus subagent sidecars confirm the engine was agent-built. Only the main-loop counts are lost (Section 9).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

> Engine Role Lang. Primary agent Files LOC Prompts In (kTok) Out (kTok) Norm. USD List USD COBOL-chess ♭main COBOL Codex 76 8,890 24 463,436 2,013 $473.50 $332.02 chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex port Rust Codex 45 11,141 33 467,345 1,019 $472.44 $330.57 chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex port COBOL Codex 66,770 28 339,290 889 $343.73 $241.16 chess-brainfuck ♭main Brainfuck Codex 56 6,920 30 231,397 641 $234.60 $165.43 chess-cobol-cc main COBOL CC 411,578 46 178,659 592 $181.62 $518.44 lean-chess main Lean 4 Codex 15 2,333 21 172,738 487 $175.17 $123.23 chess-latex-codex-replication main LaTeX Codex 46 5,222 15 167,596 532 $170.26 $119.73 chess-newlang-codex DSL C++ (host) Codex 11 4,658 21 159,132 351 $160.89 $113.04 chess-apl-codex54 ♭main APL Codex 10 3,652 26 152,765 550 $155.52 $110.68 cplusplus-chess main C++ Codex 34 4,420 16 109,611 800 $113.61 $81.01 chess-rust-cc-redo main Rust CC 18 3,329 55 95,901 1,458 $103.19 $63.94 chess-ruby-codex main Ruby Codex 43 124,443 785,463 176 $86.34 $60.76 chess-assembly-codex main Asm Codex 912,310 12 64,717 269 $66.06 $47.01 chess-brainfuck-cc ♭main Brainfuck CC 18 7,879 51 57,169 86 $57.60 $154.24 chess-ruby-cc main Ruby CC 22 2,964 46 47,320 224 $48.44 $148.17 chess-py main Python Codex 22 3,890 10 38,045 480 $40.45 $29.29 chess-css-codex main CSS/HTML Codex 22 38,684 17 35,635 315 $37.21 $27.14 chess-mojo ‡underconv. Mojo Codex 28 3,472 732,720 187 $33.65 $24.06 chess-why3 main Why3 →OCaml Codex 46 4,530 932,832 127 $33.47 $23.92 chess-java main Java Codex 22 2,835 729,848 136 $30.53 $21.85 chess-icon-codex main Icon Codex 22 3,217 626,565 133 $27.23 $19.51 chess-purec-codex main CCodex 16 3,095 421,553 140 $22.25 $15.99 chess-rust-codex main Rust Codex 81,819 320,787 114 $21.36 $15.32 chess-css-codex-guided main CSS/HTML Codex 42,077 914,597 130 $15.25 $11.10 latex-chess-engine main TeX Codex 23 41,185 14 7,493 50 $7.74 $5.71 chess-java-cc main Java CC 35 4,884 31,890 14 $1.96 $7.74 chess-Rocq main Rocq →OCaml CC 51 6,335 41,410 16 $1.49 $4.75 chess-cplusplus-claude main C++ CC 28 4,248 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †
> chess-purec main CCC 28 3,158 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †
> chess-py-cc main Python CC 22 2,995 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †
> chess-rust-cc main Rust CC 27 5,872 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †
> chess-sql main SQL CC 15 2,016 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †
> chess-why3-cc main Why3 →OCaml CC 234 91,558 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †
> chess-css-cc ( a.k.a. test-superset) co-design CSS+JS CC 46 224,772 n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †n/a †

not substantively larger engine cores but artefact-inflated repositories: chess-ruby-codex ships a large PGN game database alongside the engine, and chess-why3-cc 

vendors the C source trees of several third-party opponent engines for in-repo Elo benchmarking (while its own engine extracts from Why3 to OCaml). The other two are large by construction: the co-design ChessCSS engine compiles its move logic into 

≈55k generated CSS rules, and TeXCCChess spreads engine code and tables across 

≈40 kLOC of TeX. The point to take away is not the absolute LOC numbers but how LOC tracks the category: legacy and esoteric targets need more code per equivalent capability, and very large totals are usually data or vendored infrastructure, not algorithm. 

Claim supported by the table. Agents produce a working chess engine in at least two variants of most mainstream languages and in at least one variant of every category in our taxonomy. Coverage is per session , not per language since two engines in the 16 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

same language can lead to very different outcomes and are thus two data points, not one. 

Languages where the agents pushed past prior art. The first-of-kind and no-comparable-reference claims below rest on a four-step search: (1) general-purpose web search (Google), (2) GitHub code- and repository-search restricted to the relevant language, (3) reading of relevant community discussions (chess-engine forums, language-community fora, public Reddit threads), and (4) cross-checking with an LLM-powered deep-research tool (OpenAI Deep Research) to surface references the first three steps may have missed. Throughout, “first-of-kind” and “no comparable public reference” denote the absence of a prior open-source artefact of comparable scope (a playable engine with at least move generation, legal-move checking, and a search routine), not the absence of any mention. A subset of the corpus is consequential beyond a coverage checkmark. In latex-chess-engine (TeXCCChess) the agent produced what is, to our knowledge, the first chess engine of comparable scope written in expl3 /TeX macros, with a self-reported 

≈1300 Elo. chess-css-cc and the strict-CSS companion of chess-css-codex are the first chess engines we are aware of where rules and move generation are expressed in pure CSS (with a minimal JavaScript harness for I/O and the game loop). The APL, Icon, Lean 4, Why3, and Rocq engines are, to our knowledge, likewise first-of-kind: in none of these languages does an open-source chess engine of comparable scope appear to have been previously published. For APL, the closest prior art our search surfaced is a 2008 Dyalog chess GUI demonstration without an engine, board-puzzle solvers (knight’s tour, n-queens), and a three-player variant ruleset, none of comparable scope. Brainfuck is a slightly different case: discussions and prototype gestures toward a Brainfuck chess engine exist in the public record, and private exchanges with experts confirm that the topic has been raised more than once, but no surviving open-source artefact of comparable scope has come to light through our four-step search. Of the two corpus engines, the Claude Code one is the first we are aware of that ships a complete uci -compliant pure-Brainfuck engine playing Stockfish gauntlets. The 

Codex engine plays as well but kept part of its engine logic in the Python toolchain, a shortfall of the pure-language constraint that its repository documents (Section F). The COBOL novelty is similar: small hobby experiments exist, but each of our three COBOL engines ships its own move generator, search, uci loop, and Elo harness. The Mojo case is the weakest in the corpus: the special-role chess-mojo session produced a working but weak engine, near 900 Elo on its in-session gauntlets (the 1100 Elo of Table 6 is the agent’s pre-measurement planning estimate), and stopped under the user’s budget. It plays legal chess and satisfies the “working engine” criterion, but it sits below every main-corpus engine in playing strength, so we classify it as an 

underconverged case (Section C). Beyond demonstrating polyglot coverage, the agents produced engines in programming languages where, to the best of our knowledge, no chess engine had previously been developed. Boundary cases: where the language is the ceiling. Four engines in the main corpus illustrate the engineering challenges of building under restrictive PL characteristics and constraints. 

Brainfuck has eight instructions over a flat memory tape with a single data pointer. There are no variables, no functions, and no random memory access (no 

board[i] with runtime i) Acher (2026a). The agent’s strategy was correspondingly Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 17 

indirect: a Python code generator ( ≈7,400 LOC) tracks a virtual data pointer at generation time and emits the corresponding > and < runs plus pattern-encoded higher-level operations. Each board read or write expands to ≈20 kB of BF because indexed access has to be reconstructed as a 64-way switch over fixed-cell positions. The resulting chess.bf weighs 5.6 MB and reads as long sequences of pointer movement and cell zeroing: 

> >>>>>>>>>>>>>>[-][-]+[>...]>[-]>[-]>[-]>[-]> ...

Search looks only three half-moves ahead, where competitive engines routinely look 15 or more, and the session’s own gauntlet placed the engine at 578 Elo (Table 6). 

LaTeX engines (an expl3 replication at ≈550 Elo and TeXCCChess at ≈1300 Elo) look only two half-moves ahead, the shallowest depth in the corpus. T EX is a macro-expansion language designed for typesetting: no native arrays, no recursion in the conventional sense, no boolean expressions, and no return statement. A procedure “returns” by mutating a globally-scoped register. The quiescence-search routine in TeXCCChess Acher (2026b) illustrates the cost:   

> \def\mm@quiesce{% \evaluate \mm@standpat=\evalscore\relax \ifnum\mm@standpat<\mm@qbeta\relax \ifnum\mm@standpat>\mm@qalpha\relax \mm@qalpha=\mm@standpat\relax \fi \generatelegal \mm@copycapturesonly ... \else \global\mm@retval=\mm@qbeta\relax % stand-pat cutoff \fi }

What in a mainstream language is a one-line if standpat >= qbeta: return qbeta unfolds into nested \ifnum groups around scarce \count registers, with the return value plumbed through a \global mutation of \mm@retval (the only way to pass a value out of a recursive expansion). 

COBOL (more specifically GnuCOBOL) imposes constraints the agent must han-dle: tables require static upper bounds via OCCURS , even with OCCURS DEPENDING ON ,and recursive subprograms must be explicitly marked RECURSIVE at the PROGRAM-ID 

level. The three corpus engines therefore use conventional COBOL layouts: nested character tables for the 8×8 board, fixed-size move lists, and REDEFINES for alternate storage views. This contrasts with mainstream chess engines, where bitboards and native bitwise operators express many board operations as word-level computations. 

Assembly (chess-assembly-codex ) ships a full uci engine that is predominantly x86-64 assembly ( ≈9.5 kLOC, including the performance-critical move-generation and search core), with a smaller ≈1.9 kLOC C support layer hosting the search and evaluation data structures. Both layers were produced by the agent. Prior art in assembly exists: Sargon (1978) was published as Z80 assembly source in book form, and boot-sector engines such as BootChess (2015) fit in 512 bytes. We therefore scope the claim: we could not identify a prior open-source x86-64 assembly engine of comparable scope with full uci support. What unifies the four cases is that the agent produces working move generation, legality filtering, and a shallow search in each. What varies is how deep the search can reasonably go given the language’s execution model. These are the cases where the programming language, not the agent , is the binding constraint (Section 7). Besides, APL, Icon, Lean, and OCaml (via Rocq/Why3 extraction) are specialised 

languages with established communities and production use in other domains. They do 18 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

not target branch-heavy numerical workloads well, but they are real general-purpose or formal-methods languages. Our corpus shows them producing working engines that sit in the middle of Table 6, not at the bottom. 

Answer to RQ1. Frontier coding agents produce working chess engines across all five language categories, with multiple independent sessions per mainstream language and at least one per specialised, domain-specific, legacy, and esoteric category. Neither 

Claude Code nor Codex monopolises the space, and several engines are first-of-kind (pure TeX, pure CSS, APL, Icon, Lean 4, Why3/Rocq, and, scoped to open-source x86-64 uci engines, Assembly). On the title question, this RQ delivers the existence half: programming language no longer acts as a hard coverage barrier, and even unsuited or under-resourced PLs are reachable at modest spend. How PL still matters (ceiling, cost, SE-workload shape, verification affordance) is what RQ2 –RQ5 unpack. 

5 RQ2 (Synthesis): code synthesis and feature adaptation 

Question. Which chess-engine features does each agent-built engine implement, how do those choices vary across languages and agents, and is the resulting code a recognisable copy of an existing engine or a genuine PL-adapted synthesis? 

One question, three views. Section 5.1 reports the per-engine feature footprint over a 38-pattern catalog, that is, what each agent built. Section 5.2 runs a four-signal novelty audit at the file level: is the engine a copy? Section 5.3 zooms in to the 

algorithm level through the quiescence/TT/eval triad: when the agents re-implement the same algorithm in 11 different PLs, do they copy a canonical source, derive from a shared specification, or adapt to the language’s idiom? 5.1 What was built: the feature footprint We expand the feature vocabulary to 38 regex patterns across six groups (rules & protocol, board representation, search core, search extensions, evaluation, strong-engine features), detecting each per engine on source and documentation. Unusual syntax (Brainfuck, compiled-out macros, binary artefacts) gets a manual audit pass. Table 2 reports the rules, protocol, and board-representation matrix, the layer where every engine is dense. Table 3 reports the search-extension and evaluation/strong-engine matrix, the parts where engines diverge and where the 1500 Elo-vs-2000 Elo variance lives. 

Board representation varies within a language. This was invisible in the per-language aggregate but clear per engine: 

– In C, chess-purec uses bitboards while chess-purec-codex uses an 8 ×8 mailbox. Same language, different agent, different board representation. 

– In Rust, chess-rust-cc mixes mailbox with bitboard helpers and chess-rust-codex 

is bitboard-first. 

– Ruby engines converge on 0 ×88 mailbox across both agent sessions, and Java engines do likewise. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 19 

Table 2 RQ2 Core features: rules, protocol, and board representation. A ✓indicates the feature was detected by regex in the repository’s source or documentation. For constrained-execution-model engines (Brainfuck, LaTeX), missing ✓may reflect detection limits rather than absence. We cross-reference the per-engine report before drawing claims. Notice the diversity of board representations (0 ×88 mailbox, bitboards, 8 ×8 arrays): agents pick per engine, not per language. 

Engine Language FEN UCI PGN Cas EP Pro Chk 0x88 BB MBB MB8 MB10 chess-apl-codex54 APL ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-assembly-codex Assembly ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-brainfuck Brainfuck ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-brainfuck-cc Brainfuck ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-purec C ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-purec-codex C ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-cplusplus-claude C++ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

cplusplus-chess C++ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

COBOL-chess COBOL ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-cobol-cc COBOL ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-css-codex CSS/HTML ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-css-codex-guided CSS/HTML ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-icon-codex Icon ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-java Java ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-java-cc Java ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-latex-codex-replication LaTeX ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

latex-chess-engine LaTeX (TeX) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

lean-chess Lean 4 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-py Python ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-py-cc Python ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-Rocq Rocq →OCaml ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-ruby-cc Ruby ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-ruby-codex Ruby ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-rust-cc Rust ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-rust-cc-redo Rust ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-rust-codex Rust ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-sql SQL ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-why3-cc Why3 →OCaml ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

chess-why3 Why3 →OCaml ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Table 3 RQ2 Per-engine search and evaluation feature matrix. Search core : Negamax, αβ ,iterative deepening, quiescence, transposition table, Zobrist hashing, perft. Search extensions :MVV-LVA ordering, killer moves, history heuristic, PV move, null-move pruning, LMR, LMP, aspiration windows, futility, razoring. Evaluation & strong-engine features : material, PST, tapered mid/endgame scoring, king safety, pawn-structure terms, mobility, opening book, endgame tables, time management, NNUE. The right-block extensions are what typically separate an 1500 Elo from an 2000 Elo agent-built engine in the same language. Tapered evaluation, king safety, and pawn structure appear in roughly half the mainstream cells, NNUE in one engine, and endgame tables only where C/C ++ tooling makes them practical.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

> Search core Search extensions Evaluation & strong-engine Engine Lang Neg αβ ID Qs TT Zob Pft MVV Kil His PV NMP LMR LMP Asp Fut Raz Mat PST Tap KS PS Mob Bk EGT TM NNUE chess-apl-codex54 APL ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-assembly-codex Asm ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-brainfuck BF ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-brainfuck-cc BF ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-purec C✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-purec-codex C✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-cplusplus-claude C++ ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> cplusplus-chess C++ ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> COBOL-chess COBOL ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-cobol-cc COBOL ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-css-codex CSS/HTML ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-css-codex-guided CSS/HTML ✓✓✓✓
> chess-icon-codex Icon ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-java Java ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-java-cc Java ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-latex-codex-replication LaTeX ✓✓✓✓✓✓
> latex-chess-engine TeX ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> lean-chess Lean 4 ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-py Python ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-py-cc Python ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-Rocq Rocq →OCaml ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-ruby-cc Ruby ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-ruby-codex Ruby ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-rust-cc Rust ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-rust-cc-redo Rust ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-rust-codex Rust ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-sql SQL ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-why3-cc Why3 →OCaml ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> chess-why3 Why3 →OCaml ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓

– The COBOL engines split: chess-cobol-cc uses an 8 ×8 OCCURS -indexed array, 

COBOL-chess uses a flat mailbox, chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex mirrors the Java reference. The paper’s language-is-a-ceiling-not-a-point claim (Section 11) sits here: the agent picks a board representation per session, not per language. 

Search is where the strength variance lives. Every engine in the mainstream-GP rows implements alpha–beta + iterative deepening + at least one of {quiescence, transpo-sition table}. The interesting variance is in the extension layer: aspiration windows, 20 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

LMR, LMP, history heuristic, null-move. These are agent-initiated improvements that surface after the user says “improve the Elo” without specifying what to improve. The correlation with the external Elo assessment (Table 6) is positive, and we discuss the confound in Section 7. The right block of Table 3 shows this directly: mainstream engines where every extension fires (the chess-rust-cc , chess-purec , chess-py-cc 

rows are 9–10 of 10 extensions present) sit at the top of Table 6, whereas engines where extensions are sparse plateau lower. 

Evaluation and advanced features. Material and PST are near-universal. Tapered evaluation, king safety, and pawn structure appear in about half the mainstream engines and are absent from the constrained-execution-model rows. NNUE and endgame tables appear in at most one or two engines each: the effort budget of a typical frontier-agent session does not reach these. The right-most block of Table 3 confirms: NNUE fires once ( chess-why3-cc ), and endgame tables appear only in C/C ++ -tooled engines. 

5.1.1 Feature-introduction trajectory 

Which features are implemented is one question. When during the session they are introduced is a different one and, for the language-is-not-destiny argument, the more revealing. We scanned every authoring event in the transcripts of four representative engines spanning the paper’s main language categories (Ruby, COBOL, LaTeX, Brainfuck), matched new content against the 38-pattern catalogue, and recorded the first step at which a pattern landed. The cumulative-count curve over normalised progress is depicted in Figure 2. Ruby and COBOL converge on a similar final feature set along different paths (a single burst vs. a 37-step accretion), whereas LaTeX and Brainfuck reach different final sets because their languages prevent the agent from spending effort on the search-extension tier without crushing runtime. Languages affect both what the agent can reach and how long it takes to get there, but they do not affect which core (FEN, castling, alpha–beta, material eval) the agent reaches for first. 

5.1.2 Feature implementation depth: sub-feature analysis 

The 38-pattern catalogue measures presence but not depth. A complementary pipeline (Section 3.3) extracts a per-engine hotspot for three features (quiescence search, transposition table, evaluation/PST) and applies 13 sub-feature regexes. Per-feature tier breakdowns and per-engine matrices are in the replication artefact (reports/features/ , Data and code availability). Two findings carry forward to the rest of the paper. First, the rare sub-features in quiescence (delta pruning, SEE pruning, check evasion in qsearch) concentrate in engines that received “improve the Elo” prompt iteration, confirming that prompt pressure drives exploration of the extension layer. Second, across all three features the same second-tier layer is missing (check evasion in quiescence, age-based and depth-preferred replacement in TT, king safety and tapered evaluation in PST): LLMs implement the core specifica-tion reliably and miss the addenda that require additional bookkeeping. The five-tier evaluation taxonomy shows that the most structural diversity sits in evaluation, not in search: Tier 0 (material only), Tier 1 (basic PST lookup), Tier 2 (incremental Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 21              

> 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> Session progress (step / total steps) Cumulative distinct features introduced Ruby (mainstream) COBOL (legacy) LaTeX (Codex, scratch) Brainfuck (esoteric)
> Fig. 2 Cumulative distinct chess-engine features introduced into the repository over normalised session progress, for four representative engines, one per language category (mainstream general-purpose, legacy, domain-specific markup, esoteric). Feature counts are first-appearances under the 38-pattern catalog of Section 5, matched against the new content of every Write / Edit / apply_patch event. The four trajectories take qualitatively different shapes, discussed in Section 5.1.1.

MG/EG tables), Tier 3 (full tapered evaluation, reached only by chess-ruby-cc ; the tapered-scoring column of Table 3 marks regex-level presence of tapering vocabulary, whereas the tier records the hand-audited depth of the implementation), and Tier 4 (computed/structural, e.g. lean-chess via geometric functions and chess-sql as a SQL WITH query). 5.2 Is it a copy? File-level novelty audit A fair concern about any LLM-authored artefact is that the model has emitted memorised code from its training corpus rather than a new program. Chess is a hard test of this worry because canonical open-source engines ( Stockfish , python-chess ,

chess.js , Sunfish, TSCP, Crafty, GNU Chess) dominate the domain and are almost certainly in pre-training data. For the languages where no pre-existing open-source chess engine of comparable scope appears to exist (named in Section 4: Brainfuck, pure-TeX LaTeX, pure CSS, APL, Icon, Lean 4, Why3, and Rocq), the no-copy claim is trivial since there is no public reference for the agent to have copied from. For the mainstream languages where prior engines do exist, the claim is non-trivial, and we audit it directly. We audit each such engine on four evidence streams: manifest dependencies , engine-core chess-library imports , canonical-engine fingerprints (a curated catalogue of distinctive constants and API surfaces from Stockfish , Sunfish, 

python-chess , chess.js , TSCP, and a handful of others), and transcript authorship claims (strong patterns such as “ported from” or “adapted from” and weak patterns such as “inspired by” or “based on”). The per-stream procedure, the engine-core vs. tooling-file split that removes false positives from PGN converters and test harnesses, the regex caveats for compiled-out unusual syntaxes, and the per-engine audit table itself are in Section A.2 (Table 8). 22 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

The main finding is that the corpus contains no recognisable copies. Of the 29 main-corpus engines, 27 are classified scratch , with no engine-core chess-library import, no fingerprint match, and no self-reported copy claim. One is library-assisted :

chess-rust-codex uses the Rust chess crate for board state and move generation but writes search and evaluation itself, a legitimate dependency rather than a copy. And one is the evasion case ( chess-css-codex , discussed in Section 6.3). No engine triggers a strong transcript copy claim. Weak references like “write something like Sunfish” surface only as design targets, not as port instructions. Read alongside the within-language feature diversity documented earlier in this section (different board representations, different search-extension layers, different evaluation tiers from the same agent in the same language) and the agent-trajectory evidence in RQ3 , the audit supports a no-copy reading of the corpus rather than a no-copy proof: copies would have to evade four independent signals plus the qualitative supervision protocol, and only one engine, the evasion case, visibly does so. 5.3 Algorithm-level synthesis: the quiescence triad The four-signal audit above operates at the file level: it asks whether a canonical engine’s source appears in the project tree. A complementary and finer-grained question is whether agents synthesise a specific algorithm from scratch or essentially reproduce a known specification, a distinction invisible to import-level auditing. We probe this at the level of quiescence search , chosen for three reasons: (i) it is a non-trivial but well-bounded algorithm with a canonical description on the Chess Programming Wiki, (ii) it is present in every main-corpus engine that reaches meaningful strength, and (iii) its implementation admits a natural set of optional optimisations (delta pruning, SEE pruning, check evasion, TT probe, . . . ), making it possible to distinguish a verbatim template instantiation from an agent that genuinely selects which optimisations to apply. 

Methodology. For each engine we extract the source-code region that implements quiescence search (the hotspot ), score it against a dozen sub-feature checks drawn from the Chess Programming Wiki taxonomy (delta pruning, SEE pruning, check evasion in qsearch, TT probe, depth limit, MVV-LVA ordering, . . . ), and compare every pair of hotspots on two similarity measures. Token-Jaccard treats each hotspot as a multiset of normalised source tokens (language keywords filtered) and reports the size of the intersection over the size of the union: it measures textual proximity, that is, how much vocabulary two implementations share. The feature-Jaccard treats each hotspot as a binary vector over the sub-feature checks and applies the same intersection-over-union ratio: it measures algorithmic proximity, independently of surface syntax. Two engines with high feature-Jaccard but low token-Jaccard implement the same algorithmic ideas in different languages or styles. Of the main-corpus engines, 28 have at least one quiescence match, and the analysis rests on 26 valid extractions after manual audit. 

Three representative variants. Figure 3 shows quiescence search in three contrasting languages drawn from the corpus: Java ( chess-java ), Coq/Gallina ( chess-Rocq ), and COBOL ( COBOL-chess ). The sub-feature comparison is summarised in Table 4. 

What the three variants share, and how they adapt. Every implementation traces the same five steps labelled in Figure 3: static stand-pat evaluation, β-cutoff, Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 23 

// [1] stand-pat 

int standPat = evaluator.evaluate(board ); 

boolean inCheck = board.isInCheck(board. sideToMove()); 

if (!inCheck) { // [2] beta-cutoff 

if (standPat >= beta) 

return beta; // [3] alpha-update 

if (standPat > alpha) alpha = standPat; }// [4] capture-only (or all if in check) List<Move> moves = board.generateLegalMoves (!inCheck); 

if (moves.isEmpty()) 

return inCheck ? -MATE_SCORE + ply : alpha; 

for (Move move : moves) { 

if (!inCheck && ! isTactical(move)) 

continue ;board.makeMove(move, undo); // [5] negamax sign-flip 

int score = -quiescence (-beta, -alpha, ply +1); board.unmakeMove(move, undo); 

if (score >= beta) 

return beta; 

if (score > alpha) alpha = score; }

return alpha; 

(a) Java : chess-java 

(* qdepth: nat -> termination proved *) 

Fixpoint quiesce (pos : Position) (alpha beta : int) (qdepth : nat ) : int := 

match qdepth with 

| O => evaluate pos (* [1] base case *) | S qdepth’ => 

let stand_pat := evaluate pos in (* [1] *) 

if leb beta stand_pat then 

stand_pat (* [2] *) 

else if ltb (add stand_pat delta_margin) alpha 

then stand_pat (* delta pruning *) 

else let a := if ltb alpha stand_pat (* [3] *) 

then stand_pat 

else alpha in let captures := gen_capture_moves pos in 

(* [4] *) 

let fix go (mvs : list 

Move) (cur_a : int) (fuel : nat ) : int := 

match fuel with 

| O => cur_a | S fuel’ => 

match mvs with 

| nil => cur_a | m :: rest => 

let score := negate_score (* [5] *) (quiesce ( make_move pos m) (negate_score beta) (negate_score cur_a) qdepth’) in if leb beta score 

then score 

else go rest (if ltb cur_a score 

then score 

else cur_a) fuel’ 

end end in go captures a 256% nat end .

(b) Coq/Gallina : chess-Rocq 

*> [1] stand-pat 

CALL "EVAL" USING GAME-STATE STANDPAT 

IF STANDPAT >= L-BETA *> [2] beta-cutoff 

MOVE L-BETA TO L-OUT 

GOBACK 

END-IF IF STANDPAT > L-ALPHA *> [3] alpha-update 

MOVE STANDPAT TO L-ALPHA END-IF 

*> delta pruning: 950 = queen value (cp) 

IF (STANDPAT + 950) < L-ALPHA 

MOVE L-ALPHA TO L-OUT 

GOBACK 

END-IF 

*> [4] capture-only move generation 

MOVE 1 TO CAP-ONLY 

CALL "MOVEGEN" USING GAME-STATE LS-LIST CAP-ONLY 

PERFORM VARYING I FROM 1 BY 1 

UNTIL I > ML-COUNT OF LS-LIST 

PERFORM SCORE-Q-MOVE 

END-PERFORM PERFORM VARYING I FROM 1 BY 1 

UNTIL I > ML-COUNT OF LS-LIST 

PERFORM PICK-BEST-Q 

CALL "MAKEMOVE" USING GAME-STATE LS-MOVE OK 

IF OK = 1 

COMPUTE CHILD-ALPHA = 0 - L-BETA 

COMPUTE CHILD-BETA = 0 - L-ALPHA 

CALL "QUIESCE" USING GAME-STATE *> [5] CHILD-ALPHA CHILD-BETA L-SS CHILD -SCORE 

COMPUTE CHILD-SCORE = 0 - CHILD-SCORE 

CALL "UNMAKEMOVE" USING GAME-STATE LS-

MOVE IF CHILD-SCORE > L -ALPHA 

MOVE CHILD-SCORE TO L-ALPHA 

IF L-ALPHA >= L-BETA 

MOVE L-BETA TO L-OUT 

GOBACK 

END-IF 

END-IF 

END-IF 

END-PERFORM MOVE L-ALPHA TO L-OUT 

GOBACK .

(c) COBOL : COBOL-chess 

Fig. 3 Quiescence search in three languages. Labels [1]–[5] mark the five invariant algorithmic steps shared by all 26 valid corpus extractions: [1] stand-pat evaluation, [2] β-cutoff, [3] α-update, [4] capture-only move generation, [5] negamax sign-flip. PL-specific adaptations are discussed in the text. Sub-feature scores and pairwise distances in Table 4. 24 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel Sub-features present Pairwise sim. Engine count features missing key feat-J tok-J                        

> chess-java 7/13 sp, bc, au, co, dl, ce, nr delta, see ——
> chess-Rocq 4/13 sp, co, dp, dl bc ∗, au ∗, nr, ce 38% 10%
> COBOL-chess 4/13 sp, co, dp, mv bc ∗, au ∗, nr, ce 22% 9%
> Rocq ↔COBOL 60% 8%
> Table 4 Sub-feature profiles and pairwise distances for the three variants in Figure 3. Abbrevi-ations: sp=stand_pat, bc=beta_cutoff, au=alpha_update, co=capture_only, dp=delta_prun-ing, dl=depth_limit, ce=check_evasion, nr=negamax_recurse, mv=mvv_lva, see=see_pruning.
> ∗Coq uses leb /ltb predicates that detect the concepts but use different tokens, explaining the low token-Jaccard. feat-J = feature-Jaccard, tok-J = token-Jaccard, both relative to chess-java
> for the first two rows and between Rocq and COBOL for the last.

α-update, capture-only move generation, and a negamax sign-flipped recursive call. The PL-specific adaptations go beyond mechanical syntax translation. Java adds a check-evasion branch unavailable in the functional and procedural variants. Coq/Gal-lina declares Fixpoint with a qdepth : nat argument (termination is proved , not assumed) and uses let ... in bindings throughout because Coq has no mutable variables, with an inner fix go carrying its own fuel : nat for the capture loop’s termination proof. COBOL replaces the outer capture loop with a PERFORM VARYING 

iterator (the recursive call to QUIESCE still exists at line [5], but the loop over captures is unrolled into an explicit index-driven iteration) and computes child bounds into named working-storage fields, reproducing the queen-value delta-pruning constant 

950 centipawns from the CPW article exactly. The Rocq–COBOL pair scores 60% feature-Jaccard against 8% token-Jaccard, two implementations that converge on the same sub-feature subset of the CPW specification while sharing almost no tokens. 

Canonical skeleton, no textual copy. Every valid extraction follows the same four-line skeleton, and the terminology confirms a common source: the wiki community term stand_pat /standpat /STANDPAT appears in 19 of 26 extractions across 11 PLs. Yet at the character level the implementations are not copies of each other. Token-Jaccard peaks at 47% (a Java engine and its direct Rust port) and is typically 15–30% across language boundaries. Algorithmic similarity is substantially higher: 

chess-java-cc ↔ chess-purec (Java and C, different models) reaches 88% feature-Jaccard, and four pairs across C/C++, Java, Rust, and Ruby reach ≥80% on cross-language, cross-model pairs that share no token-level similarity. The clearest smoking gun is the delta-pruning threshold: where present (11 of 26 engines), the constant is always 900–950 centipawns, the exact value in the CPW delta-pruning article, which independent derivation would not reproduce so precisely. The pattern is a shared community specification plus substantial per-variant divergence in sub-feature selection and PL idiom rather than textual inheritance from any canonical engine. We make this divergence inspectable through the Chess Engine Feature Explorer web tool (Section B.5), which lets a reviewer browse the 28 corpus variants and compare any pair side by side at the source-code level with the 13 sub-feature chips rendered as a header band. 

Extending the triad: TT and evaluation. The same hotspot pipeline applied to transposition tables (21 valid extractions) finds a different divergence pattern. Zobrist Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 25 

hashing is universal, but architectural choices diverge: C/C++/Java engines allocate flat power-of-two arrays, chess-ruby-cc uses Ruby’s native hash, lean-chess stores entries as Option Move in a HashMap , and COBOL-chess uses OCCURS 500000 TIMES .For evaluation/PST (10 valid extractions out of 19 pattern matches), the most direct novelty test is whether any engine reproduces a canonical engine’s material constants: Sunfish ( R=479, N=280, Q=929 ) and the CPW simplified values. No generated chess engines reproduce either, across all extractions. lean-chess replaces lookup tables with geometric functions, and chess-sql expresses evaluation as a SQL WITH query. 

Answer to RQ2. Every agent-built engine implements a core of rules and a minimal search, and above the core, feature choice varies substantially within a language. On the novelty question, 27 of 29 main-corpus engines are scratch-built on the four-signal audit, 1 uses a language-native chess crate, 1 evaded the language constraint (Section 6.3), while no agent ever self-reported porting or adapting a canonical engine. Overall, coding agents have absorbed an abstract chess programming specification deeply enough to regenerate it in any language, but variants differ markedly in which sub-features they actually implement. 

The generated code is not a textual copy of any canonical source: numerical constants are generated fresh, and PL-specific structural adaptations (e.g., Coq termination proofs, COBOL working-storage, SQL WITH-query evaluation) go well beyond syntax translation. 

6 RQ3 (Validation): how agent teammates demonstrate correctness 

Question. How do AI coding-agent teammates demonstrate that the software they produce is correct? Which oracles do they wire up, and when in the session do those oracles fire? Do they even “cheat”, and what supervision is needed to keep the experiment honest? Most polyglot evaluation benchmarks (MultiPL-E Cassano et al. (2023), SWE-bench Jimenez et al. (2024), Aider Polyglot Gauthier (2024)) take the test suite as given, making the validation layer invisible. In our corpus the agents construct their own oracles, which makes validation behaviour observable. This section provides an empirical baseline. 6.1 The validation stack the agents wire up The background (Section 2.3) introduced the three oracle levels chess offers: perft 

batteries that pin down move-generation correctness against published reference counts, gameplay against a calibrated reference engine through the uci protocol, and Elo aggregation across those games. The question here is which of those levels each 

agent actually wired up on its own initiative, and what shape that wiring takes across the corpus. We fold uci conformance into the gameplay layer rather than tracking it separately, because an engine that fails the handshake never enters a gauntlet in the first place. The handshake itself is a non-trivial achievement in constrained-execution targets such as Brainfuck and L ATEX, where a UCI shim has to be hand-built around the engine core, but we track it implicitly through gauntlet entry rather than as a dedicated column. 26 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 5 reports the per-engine result. The table tracks five observable valida-tion artefacts: a perft harness for the move-generation oracle, three faces of the gameplay layer (a Stockfish gauntlet, a cutechess-cli runner, and a random-mover baseline), and a bespoke Elo script for the strength layer. The few engines with-out a gauntlet column either never reached uci conformance ( chess-css-codex ,

chess-css-codex-guided ) or routed validation through a non-UCI bespoke runner (chess-brainfuck , chess-brainfuck-cc , the two Java →language ports that scored against their parent engine rather than Stockfish ). 

Table 5 Validation infrastructure each agent set up without explicit user instruction , detected from repository contents at corpus snapshot. Each column flags a specific oracle or harness the agent built or wired up, ordered roughly from exact to ordinal . Perft harness : the engine ships its own perft (move-generation count) test code, comparing against published reference values to verify move generation is correct (independent of search and evaluation). Stockfish gauntlet : a tournament against Stockfish as the reference opponent (with or without UCI_-LimitStrength ). It requires the engine to honour the uci protocol and play legal moves under arbitrary positions for a full game. cutechess-cli runner : the gauntlet (or any multi-engine match) is driven through cutechess-cli, the de-facto chess-engine tournament harness. Running cleanly through cutechess-cli is itself a non-trivial conformance test because the engine must answer uci , isready , position , and go correctly across hundreds of positions and emit bestmove 

on time. Random-mover baseline : a random-legal-move opponent invoked when Stockfish 

trivially wins (used as a floor reference for the weakest engines). Bespoke Elo script : a per-repo Python or shell script that runs the engine, computes a logistic Elo from the score, and prints a number. Together with the gauntlet, this is the agent’s own self-evaluation pipeline. 

Self-play harness : engine versus older versions of itself, present only in engines strong enough to learn from it. Test files : count of files matching tests?/ or *_test* at any depth in the repository (a coarse build-system–integration signal, not specific to chess oracles).                                                                                                                                                                               

> Engine Language Perft harness Stockfish gauntlet cutechess runner Random baseline Bespoke Elo script Self-play harness #Test files
> chess-apl-codex54 APL ✓✓✓✓✓3
> chess-assembly-codex Assembly ✓✓✓0
> chess-brainfuck Brainfuck ✓✓✓6
> chess-brainfuck-cc Brainfuck ✓✓✓1
> chess-cobol-cc COBOL ✓✓1
> chess-cplusplus-claude C++ ✓✓✓✓4
> chess-css-cc CSS/HTML ✓✓0
> chess-css-codex CSS/HTML ✓1
> chess-css-codex-guided CSS/HTML ✓0
> chess-icon-codex Icon ✓✓✓✓0
> chess-java Java ✓✓✓✓0
> chess-java-cc Java ✓✓✓0
> chess-latex-codex-replication LaTeX ✓✓✓0
> chess-mojo ‡Mojo ✓✓✓✓✓2
> chess-newlang-codex DSL (newlang) ✓✓✓0
> chess-purec C✓✓✓4
> chess-purec-codex C✓✓✓0
> chess-py Python ✓✓✓5
> chess-py-cc Python ✓✓✓5
> chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex Java →COBOL port ✓0
> chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex Java →Rust port ✓✓6
> chess-Rocq Rocq →OCaml ✓✓✓3
> chess-ruby-cc Ruby ✓✓✓✓7
> chess-ruby-codex Ruby ✓✓✓5
> chess-rust-cc Rust ✓✓✓✓1
> chess-rust-cc-redo Rust ✓✓✓✓1
> chess-rust-codex Rust ✓✓✓✓0
> chess-sql SQL ✓✓✓7
> chess-why3 Why3 →OCaml ✓✓✓0
> chess-why3-cc Why3 →OCaml ✓✓✓✓308
> COBOL-chess COBOL ✓✓✓15
> cplusplus-chess C++ ✓✓✓1
> latex-chess-engine LaTeX (TeX) ✓✓0
> lean-chess Lean 4 ✓✓✓0

What the audit shows. The modal validation footprint pairs the perft oracle with the gameplay-gauntlet layer. 26 of the 34 engines ship a perft harness and 30 wire up a Stockfish gauntlet, and the combination is present across every Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 27 

PL category from mainstream to esoteric. The gauntlet itself almost always runs through cutechess-cli, with 29 of the 34 engines using it as their tournament harness. The five exceptions either run a bespoke runner or skip the gameplay layer altogether (chess-brainfuck , chess-brainfuck-cc , chess-css-codex ,

chess-css-codex-guided , chess-ruby-codex ). Running cleanly under cutechess-cli is itself a non-trivial conformance test, because the harness throws arbitrary middlegame and endgame positions at the engine for hundreds of games and expects legal, on-time moves throughout. Self-strength estimation is where agents take the most freedom, and where the most variance shows up. 15 of the 34 engines ship a custom Elo-estimation script of their own design, but only four come close to the truth. chess-Rocq (∆ = −1), 

chess-ruby-cc (∆ = −87 ), chess-java-cc (∆ = −116 ), and chess-rust-cc-redo 

(∆ = +110 ) all land within 150 Elo of the external Elo assessment of Table 6. The 

chess-Rocq agreement is ruler-dependent: its ∆ = −1 holds against the Phase B anchor measurement (1499 ± 171 Elo), while the unified Bradley-Terry refinement places the engine lower (1315 ± 83 Elo, Section E.6). Two of those four, chess-Rocq 

and chess-rust-cc-redo , triangulated across multiple UCI_Elo levels with ≥100 games per level, which is the single methodological choice that most reliably keeps the self-claim near the truth. The other eleven of the 15 overestimate by 200 Elo to 1100 Elo, a bias we dissect below (Section 6.2) and revisit from the cost angle in Section 8.2. Two further patterns round out the picture. Self-play harnesses are rare in the corpus, with only chess-cplusplus-claude and chess-mojo wiring one up. And two engines ( chess-apl-codex54 , chess-brainfuck-cc ) fall back to a random-legal-move opponent in addition to or instead of Stockfish , so that engines too weak to ever beat Stockfish still receive a measurable signal rather than a floor of 0/ N .6.2 Oracle-first as a population property The validation finding with the sharpest population-level signature is when the oracles fire. Looking at the first bash call of each kind in each session gives a sharp statistic: 

the median engine runs its first cargo test / make at step 2, its first perft test at step 2, and its first cutechess/custom-Elo gauntlet at step 1 . Agents reach for the strong-oracle stack essentially from the first substantive response, and they do not wait to be asked to evaluate. This is oracle-first behaviour , and the corpus-wide number is the strongest single behavioural signal of the agentic-SE shift Li et al. (2025): pre-agent code-generation tools produced code and waited for a human evaluator. Current agents produce code and then check their own work against external oracles ,where the domain admits them. A second pattern, harder to spot in aggregate but visible per session, is that when the gameplay plateaus, the strongest agents switch to self-Elo triangulation. chess-Rocq ’s agent ran three calibrated UCI_Elo levels (1320, 1500, 1700), each with 100 games at TC =10s +0.1s, explicitly triangulated around the level scoring closest to 50%, and explicitly acknowledged uncertainty in the published number. The fixable form of self-Elo bias is methodology choice, not the existence of 

Stockfish as an opponent. 

Section 7 reports that most agents’ self-reported Elo is biased 200 Elo to 1100 Elo above the external assessment. Through the validation lens, the same numbers are an empirical statement about which oracle the agent optimises against , rather than 28 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

about reporting accuracy alone. Three sources compound. The first is Stockfish ’s 

UCI_LimitStrength drift at the high end of the ladder. The second is time-control choice, since most agent gauntlets used 50–200 ms per move, where shallow fixed-depth search is structurally favoured. The third is small per-opponent sample size, with a median of 10–30 games whose ≈300 Elo standard error is reported as a point estimate. The arithmetic is direct. On this hardware, nominal UCI_Elo =2400 plays at ≈2050 Elo effective and UCI_Elo =2600 at ≈2150 Elo. An agent that self-evaluates only at the two highest rungs measures real 20 Elo eval improvements as noise (false negatives), while small “style” improvements at the compressed configuration register as 200 Elo jumps (false positives). The reward signal the agent climbs is not the gradient of true Elo, and the extreme case is chess-assembly-codex , which claims 2481 Elo against an external 1403 Elo ( ∆ = −1078 , reproducible across configurations). An 11-engine self-reproduction sweep, which re-ran each engine’s original eval methodology unchanged (953 games, Section E.9), confirms that the bias is embedded in the methodology rather than in any one run: 9 of 11 engines reproduce within ±150 Elo of their original self-claim, yet the reproduced numbers sit on average 348 Elo above the external assessment. The self-Elo oracle layer an agent constructs thus determines whether its own loop converges to a generalising or non-generalising strength claim. What the biased signal did to the spend is taken up in Section 8.2. 6.3 Do agents try to cheat? A qualitatively different validation question arises when the experiment is about 

language : can the agent satisfy the user’s literal request while side-stepping its spirit by importing a permissive library that does the chess work? In our corpus the answer is yes, occasionally, in ways the supervision protocol catches .

CSS evasion ( chess-css-codex ). Asked for a CSS chess engine, Codex’s early drafts silently imported python-chess in src/chess_css/engine.py , search.py ,and uci.py as the rules +move-gen backbone while CSS only rendered the board, leaving a Python engine with CSS decorations. The novelty audit (Section 5.2) flags the engine as fingerprint-match , the only such case in the corpus. 

Rust crate evasion ( chess-rust-codex ). A subtler case in a mainstream language. Codex’s first Rust attempt did not paste any canonical engine’s source, but engine-core files ( src/uci.rs and src/engine.rs ) import the Rust chess crate and delegate board representation, move generation, and legal-move checking to that third-party library. The agent authored only search and evaluation. The audit classifies the engine as library-assisted and the crate dependency is genuinely idiomatic Rust, but by the study’s intent half the engine had been outsourced. The manifest-and-import grep caught this, and we re-ran Rust from a blank slate as chess-rust-cc-redo 

(deep-dive in Section D), the strongest from-scratch Rust engine in the corpus. 

Counterexample (ChessCSS) and a near-evasion the agent refused (Brainfuck). 

The same target language can hold the constraint under a different protocol. 

test-superset (“ChessCSS” Acher and Claude Code (2026)) is a CSS-rule-based engine ( ≈55k CSS rules, with a minimal JavaScript harness for I/O and the game Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 29 

loop) built over 31 commits of progressive JS →CSS migration under sustained expert steering, the README explicitly noting that the human had to drive the agent with technical expertise to keep the constraint. Conversely, the Brainfuck engine (chess-brainfuck-cc , deep-dive report in the replication artefact) is authored as a Python code-generator that emits Brainfuck. When the user asked whether the chess logic should “just live in Python and the engine call out to BF for the I/O loop”, the agent argued in the session log for keeping all chess decisions inside the BF tape and accepted the additional cost. The episode shows agents can hold a language constraint when it is named. 

The supervision protocol. The lesson is not that agents are adversarial (they are not), but that “write a chess engine in L” is under-specified once a library M exists in training data that trivialises the language-specific work. The asymmetry between the CSS and Rust cases is informative. In CSS the library is structurally inappropriate and the evasion stands out at a glance. In Rust the library is idiomatic and the evasion blends in with how a Rust engineer would normally start a project. We therefore apply a four-step qualitative supervision protocol on every engine (read the engine-core diff, grep for chess-library imports, verify the oracle is independent, redirect when evasion is detected). The full protocol is in Section B.8. Under that protocol we found exactly one engine-core fingerprint match ( chess-css-codex ) and one library-assisted engine ( chess-rust-codex ). The no-further-evasion result is 

conditional on the protocol having been applied . ProgramBench Yang et al. (2026) corroborates the structural risk at scale: under their adversarial sandbox, frontier models still attempt source lookup in 1–36% of runs across four model families. 

Answer to RQ3. AI coding-agent teammates demonstrate correctness in this domain by autonomously constructing a stacked oracle pipeline: perft for move-generation correctness, Stockfish matches over the uci protocol for gameplay-level legality and result aggregation, self-Elo estimates for performance strength, and occasionally head-to-head round-robins between sibling engines. Agents build it typically in that order, and typically without being asked. The median engine runs its first perft test at session step 2 and its first gauntlet at step 1. Validation behaviour is, however, uneven in quality since most agents’ self-Elo is methodologically biased (Section 6.2). Validation behaviour also has a language-constraint failure mode: cheating via permitted-library imports, with one cleanly cheating engine (chess-css-codex ), one positive counterexample under expert co-design (ChessCSS), and one near-evasion the agent refused when explicitly named (Brainfuck). Overall, 

frontier agents are capable of validation, their validation methodology is uneven, and language constraints must be controlled by the developers. 7 RQ4 (Strength): does the PL matter for Elo? 

Question. What playing strength does each engine reach under a unified re-evaluation harness, and how does the resulting Elo distribution relate to programming language, implemented feature set, and the validation rigor we characterised in RQ3 ?After RQ1 –RQ3 settled whether and how agents build engines across PLs, the title question’s impact half asks whether the choice of PL still moves the engine’s reachable strength (Elo). The answer is yes : PL category sets a loose upper bound 30 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

on reachable Elo, and within-language variance lives strictly below it. The tendency is descriptive, not causal (Section 9), but it is robust. 

Two numbers per engine. The external number comes from the canonical re-evaluation platform of Section 3.6: every UCI-conformant engine plays the same five externally-rated references (Rustic 1820 Elo, Asymptote 2150 Elo, and calibrated Stockfish 

Skill 5/10/15) at a fixed TC =120s +1s, with the full match protocol in Section E. This is the same kind of gauntlet the agents run against Stockfish , only against calibrated, externally-rated opponents. Table 6 reports it alongside the Elo each engine claimed for itself (from its own bench scripts or transcript). A dozen weaker engines lost (or won) every game against this panel, so it can only place them “below 

∼1300 Elo.” To pin those down we also let the engines play each other and fit one Bradley-Terry model over all the games at once, which turns the bound into an actual number such as chess-ruby-cc at 1753 Elo. Such refined cells are marked †.This corpus-wide pooling is a step our analysis takes after the fact. A single agent session, which only ever plays the references, cannot do it, so the panel itself, not the refinement, is the practical lesson for self-evaluation. The agents’ own in-tree 

pgn gauntlets, where they exist, track the self-claim and we cite them only for triangulation. They are not a cross-engine ruler, since each used a different opponent set, time control, and game count. We omit a perft (move-generation) column. That lower layer is audited under RQ3 (Table 5), and the correctness signal that matters here, namely that every gauntlet game is a legal, parseable chess game, is already guaranteed by the scoring. 

What Table 6 supports. The top of the table is mainstream-compiled. chess-java-cc 

(2096 Elo) and chess-rust-cc-redo (1989 Elo) lead, with the Java →Rust port (1922 Elo), chess-rust-cc (1841 Elo), and the C ++ and Ruby Claude Code engines filling out a 1700 Elo–2100 Elo top band that no specialised, legacy, or esoteric engine reaches. Self-reports diverge from this external number by hundreds of Elo, almost always upward. The ∆ column (external minus self) clusters around −200 to −400 

and runs to −1078 for chess-assembly-codex , the record overestimation. Only three engines under-report (Pattern B: chess-ruby-codex +426 , chess-why3 +202 , and 

chess-rust-cc-redo +110 , where the agent deliberately published a conservative number), and chess-Rocq (∆ = −1 against its Phase B anchor measurement, though the Bradley-Terry refinement is less kind, Section 6.1) is the lone session whose self-claim lands on the external number. The ranking is not an artefact of one measurement: where the panel resolves an engine, an independent corpus-wide round-robin reproduces the same order (Pearson r = 0 .94 , Section A.3). And language is a ceiling rather than a point. Within Java the external estimate spans 1509 Elo (chess-java ) to 2096 Elo ( chess-java-cc ), within Rust 1723 Elo to 1989 Elo, and within Ruby 1346 Elo to 1753 Elo, while the two L ATEX engines (self-reporting 

≈550 Elo and ≈1300 Elo, both unresolved by the external panel) sit a full band apart in the same language. The headline ranking settled, the rest of RQ4 pulls out the observations the distribution makes possible: whether a strong design survives a change of language, how Elo tracks the feature set and the agent’s oracle rigor, how the self-Elo claim moves within a session, and where the corpus floor really sits. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 31 

Table 6 Evidence of strength per engine: self-reported vs. external assessment. Self : the Elo number(s) the engine itself reports (single value or min–max band, from repository bench files plus agent-transcript claims). External Elo Assessment : our re-evaluation of each engine against five externally-rated reference engines (Rustic 1820 Elo, Asymptote 2150 Elo, and 

Stockfish Skill 5/10/15, calibrated) at a fixed TC =120s +1s, the same kind of measurement the agents make against Stockfish , but against calibrated, externally-rated opponents (Section 7). Where an engine lost (or won) every game against the panel, the anchors only bound it. Those cells (marked †) are resolved by a unified Bradley-Terry refinement that additionally pools the corpus’s internal head-to-head games (Section E). Unmarked values are therefore Phase B anchor measurements and † values are Bradley-Terry refinements. The two rulers coincide where both exist, and both are tabulated side by side in Table 11, generated from 

eval2/results/combined_bt_summary.md . ∆: External minus Self (negative = self-overestimate “Pattern A”, positive = self-underestimate “Pattern B”, midpoint of band used for ∆). “—” =

no comparable data (no UCI handshake, underconverged, or lost every game with no refinement bound). Self values marked § are pre-measurement planning estimates from the agent’s session (the agent never ran a Stockfish gauntlet to commit a number). All unmarked Self values are post-measurement claims from a published bench file or session match. The agents’ own in-tree 

pgn gauntlet numbers, where present, are cited in the text for triangulation only, not as a ruler. Move-generation correctness (which engines ship a perft harness vs. pass an external perft battery) is reported under the validation-infrastructure audit of Table 5 (Section 6.1). We do not duplicate it here. Rows sorted by External Elo Assessment, descending.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

> Engine Language Self External Elo Assessment ∆
> chess-java-cc Java 2212 2096 ±132 −116
> chess-rust-cc-redo Rust 1879 1989 ±105 +110
> chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex Java →Rust —1922 ±106 —
> chess-rust-cc Rust 2110 1841 ±99 −269
> chess-ruby-cc Ruby 1840 1753 ±55 †−87
> chess-rust-codex Rust 2043 1723 ±103 −320
> cplusplus-chess C++ 2087 1709 ±111 −378
> chess-cplusplus-claude C++ 1897 1680 ±103 −217
> chess-newlang-codex DSL/Mini 2170 1622 ±68 †−548
> chess-why3-cc Why3 →OCaml 1882 1618 ±163 −264
> chess-py Python 1800 1616 ±55 †−184
> chess-java Java 1806 1509 ±131 −297
> chess-py-cc Python 1500–1800 §1499 ±55 †−151
> chess-Rocq Rocq →OCaml 1500 1499 ±171 −1
> chess-purec C1997 1440 ±193 −557
> chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex Java →COBOL —1404 ±69 †—
> chess-assembly-codex x86-64 asm 2481 1403 ±196 −1078
> chess-purec-codex C1670–1972 1402 ±73 †−419
> COBOL-chess COBOL 1600–1700 1365 ±80 †−285
> chess-ruby-codex Ruby 920 1346 ±72 †+426
> chess-brainfuck Brainfuck 1582 1299 ±94 †−283
> chess-cobol-cc COBOL 1630 1274 ±85 †−356
> lean-chess Lean 4 —1271 ±75 †—
> chess-why3 Why3 →OCaml 1008 1210 ±74 †+202
> chess-icon-codex Icon —1168 ±88 †—
> chess-apl-codex54 APL 1040 686 ±205 †−354
> chess-sql SQL 900–1020 523 ±297 †−437
> latex-chess-engine TeX 1300 ——
> chess-mojo §Mojo 1100 ——
> chess-brainfuck-cc Brainfuck 578 ——
> chess-latex-codex-replication LaTeX 546 ——
> chess-css-cc CSS/HTML ———
> chess-css-codex CSS/HTML ———
> chess-css-codex-guided CSS/HTML ———32 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel

Does a strong design survive a change of language? The two Java ports answer this almost in isolation. The agent translated one engine, chess-java-cc , into Rust and into COBOL under the same source design, same agent, same prompt budget . The Rust port keeps nearly all of the strength (1922 ± 106 Elo, within reach of the scratch-built Rust engines), while the COBOL port, which never resolved against the panel, lands at 1404 ± 69 Elo once refined. The design did not change, only the language did, and a ∼520 Elo gap opened, with the slower language paying for it (Section C). The two leaders confirm the other half: a CCRL-comparable solid-club to weak-expert ceiling (2096 ± 132 Elo and 1989 ± 105 Elo, the Rust one corroborated by an independent 80-game head-to-head against its Java parent, Section D) that only compiled mainstream languages reach. 

Does the feature set explain the spread? Holding language fixed, engines with richer search pipelines (aspiration windows, null-move, quiescence, TT) sit above those without, and the feature-count from Table 3 correlates positively with the external Elo in the mainstream rows. We read this as a chain rather than a direct cause: the language frames which features a session can realistically target, and the advanced ones that lift the mainstream engines (null-move, LMR, a working transposition table) are exactly what an esoteric or slow target can rarely afford. PL would then shape Elo partly through the feature set it makes practical. The correlation stays descriptive, since feature-count is also correlated with session effort and we cannot isolate a causal feature effect. 

Why does oracle rigor track Elo? Engines with higher external Elo also have more 

pgn records and more distinct Stockfish opponents in their history, up to nine calibrated levels for chess-ruby-cc . Two effects compound. More games are more observations, which both tighten the Elo estimate and give the agent a cleaner gradient to tune against, so rigor and strength co-produce each other as the agent moves to harder gauntlets once it clears the easy ones. But running many games is itself a function of speed: a weak or slow engine plays far fewer games per hour, so the esoteric and slow PLs that already sit low collect the least oracle signal, which widens the very gap they are trying to close. 

How does the self-Elo claim move during a session? Mining the agent’s own messages for Elo claims yields five shapes (Figure 4 in Section A.1): a steady climb (4 engines), a plateau ( ∼4), a roller coaster (4), a single claim (5), and silence (9). The roller coaster is the most telling. The agent posts an Elo, a later run swings down after an optimisation quietly regressed an earlier gain, and the agent usually catches the dip within one or two prompts and climbs back. These swings cluster in the stagnation-heaviest sessions ( COBOL-chess , 7 flagged steps), so they double as a supervision signal: a self-Elo that lurches up and down marks a self-improvement loop that is actually working, catching and reverting its own regressions, at the cost of the time and tokens that surface in RQ5 .

Where the floor really sits. Seven engines carry no external number, for reasons of interface or raw speed rather than any failure to play chess. The three CSS/HTML engines run in a browser and never expose a UCI loop, so the gauntlet cannot drive them, and chess-mojo is the one underconverged session, plateaued near 900 Elo. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 33 

The remaining three sit at or below the panel’s floor: the L ATEX replication engine is genuinely weak (self-reporting ≈550 Elo and losing every game it played), while TeXCCChess and the slower Brainfuck engine are too slow for a tournament clock (>30 s per move) and forfeit on time. Our search-throughput bench makes the gap concrete: the fastest C engine searches ≈4.2 M nodes/s, Python ≈42 k, and Ruby 

≈20 k, with the L ATEX and Brainfuck engines slower still. An esoteric-language engine can play perfectly legal chess yet search orders of magnitude too slowly to score against a calibrated opponent, which caps measured strength without touching the ability to build a working engine ( RQ1 ). 

Model-mastery confounder. Strength differences between two engines in the same language and the same session style (e.g., chess-ruby-cc at ≈1750 Elo vs 

chess-ruby-codex at ≈1350 Elo on the external ruler) may reflect differences in the underlying model’s fluency with the language rather than a property of the language itself. We flag this in the discussion (Section 11) and in the threats (Section 9). 

Answer to RQ4. Re-played against five calibrated external references, the corpus spans from a few hundred Elo at the floor ( chess-sql at ≈520 Elo, with the no-win LATEX and CSS engines below even that) to ≈2096 Elo for chess-java-cc . The strongest engines are solid-club to weak-expert players in Java and Rust, and the median engine sits in the 1400 Elo–1700 Elo intermediate-club band. The dozen engines too weak to separate against the panel are resolved by the Bradley-Terry refinement ( † in Table 6), which agrees with the panel on ordering (Pearson r = 0 .94 

on the measurable-anchor engines, Section A.3). The corpus answer to the title question, on this RQ, is sharp: the top tier is mainstream-compiled only. Every engine in the 1900 Elo–2100 Elo band is Java or Rust, and no specialised, domain-specific, legacy, or esoteric engine reaches it under typical-budget conditions. Within a language, two sessions can still diverge by hundreds of Elo (Java from 1509 Elo to 2096 Elo, Rust from 1723 Elo to 1989 Elo, LaTeX from 550 Elo to 1300 Elo on the engines’ own scales), so language sets a loose upper bound and the feature-set and oracle-rigor decisions move the engine under it. Overall, programming languages still matter for how strong an agent-built engine can become, even when they no longer matter for whether one can be built at all (RQ1). 8 RQ5 (Cost and effort): does the PL matter for what the AI teammate has to do? 

Question. What does it take, in user prompts, tokens, dollars of agent spend, and in the breadth and intensity of SE activities the agent has to exercise, to reach a given agent-built engine? How difficult was it to reach a first working engine, per engine ?Where RQ4 measured ceiling differences across PLs, RQ5 measures cost differ-ences. The two together are the impact half of the title question. A coarse summary of the evidence below is that a mainstream engine takes a few prompts (median 7) and ∼$2 –$115 canonical USD (median ∼$40 ), whereas a Brainfuck or COBOL engine takes ∼25–50 prompts and ∼$60 –$480, with debug fractions above 0.4 and SE-activity intensity covering all 10 categories. PL still shapes how much work the teammate actually does. 34 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 1 (page 15) reports prompts, input and output tokens, and a canonical USD figure ( Norm. USD ) computed uniformly across the corpus at a fixed reference rate of $1 per million input tokens and $5 per million output tokens (rationale in Section 3.2). We use this canonical figure throughout this section. Vendor-specific list-price USD, the amount that Claude Code and Codex would each invoice under their own cache-economics models, is preserved in the replication artefact and intentionally kept out of the body, because the two vendors’ list prices do not align well enough to support cross-engine comparison. Effort is long-tailed and is driven by oracle iteration rather than by LOC or by the language alone. The engines that climb to top-tier Elo ran the most gauntlets, the engines that stagnated against a hard PL accumulated debug prompts, and the shape holds in tokens and in USD independently as well as within each vendor. We also compute a debug fraction per session: the share of user prompts that ask the agent to fix something broken rather than to build something new. It separates smooth sessions from laborious ones. At the high end, the Ruby Claude Code session spent almost half of its prompts ( ≈0.44) repairing move-generation bugs that its own perft runs kept exposing, and the COBOL Claude Code session spent ≈0.39 of its prompts fixing crashes and illegal moves that surfaced during its gauntlet games. At the low end, engines that compiled and played correctly on the first attempt needed almost no fixing at all (0.00 for the Rust Codex engine, ≈0.05 for the Python Codex 

one). 

Difficulty per language. Mainstream general-purpose languages have the cheapest median engines (a ∼$40 median over the nine mainstream main-corpus rows with cost data, with the cheapest Rust, Java, and C rows under $30 and converging in under 30 wallclock hours). Legacy and constrained-execution-model rows are dominated by long sessions with mid-to-high debug fractions, and Brainfuck ( chess-brainfuck-cc )spanned weeks of wallclock time at a debug fraction around 0.4, the hardest case in the corpus. Specialised and academic rows (APL, Icon, Why3, Rocq, Lean) sit in the middle, with modest hours, modest prompt counts, and low debug fractions, but they plateau at lower Elo. The validation infrastructure of RQ3 (Table 5) is the underlying cost driver: cost correlates more tightly with the number of oracle iterations than with LOC, language, or final strength. 8.1 Where did the cost come from? The SE activities behind each engine The cost table reports how much each session cost and the eval-infrastructure table reports what kind of oracle the agent set up. Both stop short of saying what the agent actually did step by step : how much of the session was coding versus debugging, how much was reading versus running perft, whether build, test, and benchmark tooling was exercised at all. We therefore decompose each session’s trajectory against the 10-capability SE-activity frame described in Section 3.4 and report the per-engine intensity profile. This is the finer-grained answer to “where did the cost come from?” .It also cross-cuts the earlier RQs. The per-engine Impl column is the activity footprint behind the features of Section 5. Broad coverage of Impl , Debug , Test , and Read 

is direct evidence against any copy-and-translate reading of Section 6. Intensity in 

Debug and Bench foreshadows the strength spread of Section 7. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 35 

Each engine yields a 10-dimensional profile summarised on a 4-level Likert scale (absent, light, moderate, or heavy, based on the share of session steps tagged with each capability, with the methodology in Section B.3). The full per-engine matrix and a per-category summary are in Table 9 (Section B.6). 

Six capabilities are near-universal. Across the 33 engines with recoverable trajec-tories, implementation , code comprehension (33/33), debugging (31), testing (29), 

benchmarking & evaluation (28), and build & tooling (23) all appear in a majority of engines in every language category. A chess-engine session is not a pure coding task even in the easiest targets: the agent writes or edits code, runs and inspects existing code, runs perft and UCI smoke tests, plays Stockfish gauntlets, builds the project, and commits, regardless of whether the target is Python or Brainfuck. The oracle-first iteration style surfaced under RQ3 (first perft at step 2, first gauntlet at step 1) is the early temporal signature of this population-wide pattern. Reading the matrix row-wise, the high-intensity rows almost always correspond to the high-USD rows of Table 1, which is the per-activity version of the cost-as-oracle-iteration pattern. Excluding the underconverged chess-mojo case (kept in the matrix for transparency but excluded from main-corpus comparators, Section C), 

chess-rust-codex tops the mainstream category with 8 of 10 capabilities exercised heavily, and chess-apl-codex54 leads the specialised category with 9 of 10 and a summed intensity of 25. The spread within a single category is wide, with mainstream engines ranging from a summed intensity of 3 (archived-transcript engines, see Section B.9) to 24. Column-wise, Impl , Test , Debug , Read , Build , and Bench carry non-absent cells in essentially every row. Perf is sparse, since performance vocabulary fires mainly in legacy and esoteric targets. Design and Docs are the least saturated columns, because the capability-level prompt already serves as the plan. Across categories, mainstream engines average 6.6 distinct capabilities and esoteric engines 10.0, so what distinguishes the bottom categories is less which capabilities fire than how intensely each one does. Building a working chess engine across this corpus therefore requires software engineering rather than coding alone. The language category does not change whether the agent interrogates its own code, runs oracles, fixes its own bugs, and re-runs the build and test cycle. It only changes how much of that work is needed. 8.2 Where did the effort go, and was it well spent? 

How the effort unfolds. We segment each transcript into steps (one user prompt together with the agent work it triggers, as in Section 3.4), label every step with a task class such as feature work, debugging, or exploration, and group consecutive steps of the same class into phases (the annotation pipeline is part of the replication artefact). The median session is compact, with 10 user prompts, 2.3 wallclock hours, and 56 M pooled tokens. Per-engine totals run higher, since an engine often spans several sessions: the median main-corpus engine takes 14 prompts, and the totals stretch to 55 prompts for chess-rust-cc-redo and almost half a billion pooled tokens for COBOL-chess and the Java →Rust port (Table 1). Feature work accounts for roughly 31% of the median session’s steps and open-ended exploration for roughly 35%, and the most common phase sequence alternates between the two: the agent explores, builds, and explores again. Much of the remaining effort, and most of the 36 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

effort in the expensive sessions, goes into the validation loop. The median engine runs perft and a gauntlet within its first two prompts (Section 6.2), and the five most expensive engines of Table 1 ( COBOL-chess , the two Java ports, chess-brainfuck ,and chess-cobol-cc , from ≈$180 to $475 canonical USD each) are precisely the ones that kept re-entering that loop: play games, read the outcome, decide what to change. 

The reward signal that steered the spend. Every pass through that loop was scored by the agent’s own strength estimate, the self-Elo of RQ3 . That estimate is biased upward by 200 Elo to 1100 Elo, for the methodological reasons dissected in Section 6.2 and quantified corpus-wide by the self-reproduction sweep of Section E.9. The agent used the same estimate to decide what to keep, what to revert, and when to stop, so the self-Elo is not a reporting detail but the criterion that allocated the session budget. This has two cost consequences. First, sessions stop too early. chess-purec-codex halted after 4 prompts and $22.25 of canonical spend because the agent reported 1670 Elo–1972 Elo, while the external assessment is ≈1400 Elo, so the user accepted an engine several hundred Elo weaker than reported in the belief that the target had been reached. Stopping is the single largest cost decision in a session, and it belongs to the developer, not to the agent. It is well-founded only when the evidence that the goal has been reached is itself trustworthy. Second, value-for-money comparisons mislead. The bias differs by hundreds of Elo from engine to engine ( +141 Elo to +681 Elo across the sweep), so a ranking computed from self-claims does not survive re-measurement. Under the agents’ own numbers, 

chess-purec (claim 1997 Elo) outranks chess-rust-cc-redo (claim 1879 Elo). Under the external assessment (unified Bradley-Terry ruler), the order reverses by almost 600 Elo (1415 Elo versus 1990 Elo), and any Elo-per-dollar comparison across engines, languages, or agents inherits such reversals. The misallocation is also cheap to undo. A single controlled retry of the highest-bias engine ( chess-purec , restarted from the same commit with the same model and a 30-prompt budget, with only the self-Elo loop swapped for a gauntlet against two externally calibrated anchors) moved the engine from 1415 ± 65 Elo to 1798 ± 82 Elo for about $30, roughly $0.08 per Elo point. We treat this single run ( n=1) as supporting evidence rather than a corpus-level result, and the full protocol is in Section E.10. The broader lesson is that developers are not powerless against wasted spend. Equipping the session with a trustworthy signal, as the retry did, costs little, but it presupposes that the developer masters the correctness oracles, the benchmarking methodology, and enough of the PL and its tooling to challenge implausible claims before more budget is burned. 

Answer to RQ5. Individual engines take between a handful of prompts at a few dollars and dozens of prompts at several hundred dollars, with cost driven primarily by oracle-loop iteration rather than language category alone. Difficulty per language is best read as a distribution of per-engine values, and the most consequential cost finding concerns the reward signal (Section 8.2): the Elo the agents measured for themselves overstates the Elo an external evaluation measures. Because the agents used that inflated signal to decide which changes to keep and when to stop, part of the spend went into changes that did not improve real strength, and some sessions ended while large and cheap gains were still on the table. Keeping the cost justified Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 37 

therefore remains a developer responsibility. Choosing the PL sets the size of the bill, and validating the agent’s success claims decides whether the spend stops for the right reason. Both call for software-engineering judgement, about the oracles, the benchmarking methodology, and the language itself, that the agents in this corpus did not supply on their own. Overall, programming language still moves the cost and the SE-workload of agent-built construction by orders of magnitude. A mainstream engine costs ∼$2 –$115 canonical USD (median ∼$40 ) and takes a handful of prompts, whereas a Brainfuck or COBOL engine costs ∼$60 –$480, takes 

∼25–50 prompts, and carries a large fraction of debugging and editing steps. PL choice is no longer an existence question, but it is firmly an effort-and-cost question .

9 Threats to validity 

This is an exploratory empirical field study. Field studies observe and characterise, and they do not support causal claims. The confounders documented below collectively make causal claims about programming-language effectiveness impossible with this single-run, observational corpus, and together they specify what a follow-up controlled experiment would have to hold fixed. The existence proofs, synthesis evidence, and session-behaviour findings of Sections 4 to 8 stand independently of the causal questions this section leaves open. We follow the standard taxonomy and discuss construct, internal, external, and conclusion validity in turn. 

Construct validity. Elo as a construct assumes a reasonably stable comparison against 

Stockfish . The PGN-mined estimates each session produces vary in time control (from 10s +0.1s to 120s +1s), opponent calibration ( UCI_LimitStrength vs. actual node limits), and per-game length, so they are not strictly comparable across engines and tend to overestimate strength. The chess-java-cc session is illustrative: the agent self-claimed ≈2200 Elo from its own 40-game gauntlets, whereas the engine settles at 2096 ± 132 Elo under the canonical Phase B harness and 2094 ± 56 Elo under the unified Bradley–Terry model, still the strongest engine in the corpus but roughly 120 Elo below the self-claim. We mitigate this threat by taking every headline Elo number in the body from the unified canonical harness (Section 7, methodology in Section E), which plays all engines at a single time control of 120s +1s against externally rated CCRL anchors, and by citing the agents’ in-tree estimates only for triangulation, never as a primary ruler. Feature detection is regex-based, so unusual languages may under-report features and depress the apparent feature counts of precisely the most exotic corpus rows (Section 5). We mitigate this by manually auditing the outliers. Cost reporting depends on a rate card. The body uses a canonical Norm. USD computed uniformly from observed token volumes at a fixed reference rate of $1 per million input tokens and $5 per million output tokens, ignoring vendor-specific cache discounts (Section 3.2). The consequence is that absolute dollar values must not be read as invoiced spend. The mitigation is that the figure is intra-corpus comparable by construction, so the relative ordering across engines is reliable, and the vendor-specific list-price USD is available in the replication artefact for transparency. 38 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

We deliberately do not use list price for cross-engine comparison because Anthropic’s reduced cache-read rate dominates Claude Code sessions while Codex sessions score tokens primarily at the standard input rate, so the two invoices do not represent the same underlying compute. A handful of repositories contain transcripts from both Claude Code and Codex ,which would inflate per-engine prompt, token, cost, and SE-activity aggregates if both sessions were counted as development effort. Inspection shows the secondary agent was always invoked post-mortem to review or annotate the repository, with no engine-core writes. We mitigate the threat by excluding post-mortem sessions from all per-engine aggregates, reporting only the primary developer agent in Table 1 and flagging affected rows with ♭. The detection rule (no engine-core writes, at most five prompts, chronologically following the primary session) is conservative, and reviewers can re-classify borderline sessions via the replication artefact. 

Internal validity. Elo numbers reflect the performance of a specific binary compiled with specific flags by a specific compiler on specific hardware. All development and benchmarking took place on macOS (Apple Silicon), and at least one C engine was built with platform-specific optimisations that increase search throughput on that hardware. The consequence is that cross-engine Elo comparisons implicitly compare full (language × compiler × flags × OS × CPU architecture) stacks, and we cannot separate “this language enables high-throughput search” from “this binary was compiled with aggressive platform-native optimisations”. The canonical re-evaluation (Section E) mitigated the measurement half of this threat: every engine played under the same time control, on the same machine, against the same Docker-pinned anchor opponents. The build half remains, since each binary keeps the compiler and flags its session produced. The volume and tone of follow-up prompts also varied per session, which threatens internal validity because a human in the loop could have steered some sessions more than others and thereby injected methodology rather than mere supervision. The variation is in part intrinsic to the paper’s open-ended brief, since “what does an AI teammate produce given a capability-level goal?” admits different prompt budgets, and in part a consequence of basic interventions needed across PLs of unequal ecosystem maturity, such as installing a missing toolchain, pasting an error trace, or nudging with “improve the Elo”. To bound the threat we audited all 374 follow-up prompts across 24 corpus engines and found zero protocol-deviating prompts (named-algorithm or named-feature directives) once turn-context provenance is taken into account, so the meta-protocol held even though the volume varied. The audit script, the per-prompt classification, and the turn-context audit notes are released with the replication artefact (Data and code availability). The residual gap we cannot fully close is qualitative tone, such as encouragement versus scepticism within the same prompt class. A fully automated, human-out-of-the-loop replication, in which an LLM supervisor deterministically emits the canonical prompt schedule (Figure 1, released as PROTOCOL.md with the artefact), would close this gap structurally. The same document catalogues the pitfalls such a supervisor must avoid. The SE-activity frame, the feature catalogue, and the qualitative audits were coded by a single human rater, the first author, and we report no agreement statistic between independent human raters (Section B.4). However, reliable coding here requires joint expertise in chess-engine internals and in reading long agent transcripts, which made recruiting a comparable second rater impractical within this study. The Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 39 

cross-checks we do have are of two kinds. The per-step tagging rules are deterministic predicates over released structured records (Section 3.4), so any reader can re-code the corpus and diff the result. In addition, the analysis agent independently drafted a report for every engine, and the first author adjudicated every divergence between the report and his own reading (Section G), so a human-versus-LLM cross-check was exercised corpus-wide even though a human-versus-human statistic was not. 

External validity. The corpus is a convenience sample. 34 agent-built engines authored by one developer over about two and a half months (2026-02 to 2026-04) are not a random sample of agent–language pairs, so any generalisation risks overreach. We mitigate this by scoping claims to “what a motivated developer gets with a few thousand dollars of frontier agent spend” ( ≈$3 ,100 canonical USD summed over the 27 engines of Table 1 with recoverable cost data, special-role experiments included). Data was collected on Opus 4.6 , Opus 4.7 , gpt-5-codex , gpt-5.3-codex , and 

gpt-5.4 , and later versions may shift feature choices and achievable Elo. All results also come from closed-source commercial agents on proprietary frontier models, and effective context-window size, prompt-cache infrastructure, and polyglot fluency at the system-construction scale are reasons open-weight parity may not hold, so findings should not be extrapolated to open-weight models and open harnesses without direct measurement (Section 11 frames this as a measurable follow-up for which our artefacts provide ground truth). We deliberately did not run a one-engine open-weight baseline inside this study, because a credible baseline needs the full multi-week protocol in at least one language, and a shallow attempt would invite exactly the cross-ruler comparisons this section warns against. Relatedly, agents may have different fluencies across languages depending on training-data volume, and this design cannot separate language effects from training-data-fluency effects (Section 11). The output-side counterpart of this confound is memorisation. Chess engines are abundant in public code, so an agent could reproduce a known engine rather than synthesise one, which would contaminate both novelty and strength claims. The novelty audit (Section 5.2) mitigates this with four independent signals, and across the corpus it flagged exactly one engine-core fingerprint match and one library-assisted engine (Section 6.3). Finally, every session terminated at a human-judged plateau and per-engine investment varied widely ( ∼$1 .5 to ∼$474 canonical USD), so reported Elo values are lower bounds and cross-language comparisons conflate language properties with investment level. The canonical re-evaluation removed the measurement-strategy part of this conflation by replaying every engine under one protocol, but the budget part remains. 

Conclusion validity. We compute weighted-average Elo with inverse-variance weight-ing and report 95% confidence intervals. For small-N engines with fewer than 20 games per opponent the intervals are wide enough that per-engine ordering should not be over-read. Feature-vs-Elo correlation analyses are descriptive, and we do not apply causal inference. Each engine is also one draw from a high-variance distribu-tion over the plans the agent might have produced (LLM sampling, plan-selection randomness, sequential tool-call history). With one to three sessions per language, cross-language orderings are suggestive at best, and language-level claims in this paper are about tendencies across the observable distribution rather than about individual sessions. We also did not re-run sessions under a repeated-measures design. A session costs tens to hundreds of dollars plus a deep qualitative pass, so the budget bought breadth across 34 agent-language pairs rather than repetition within each pair. 40 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 7 Positioning of the present study among code-evaluation benchmarks and coding-agent demonstrations. Task : Func. = function-level synthesis, Issue = single-issue repair in an existing repo, Edit = code editing, System = design-and-build a complete system from scratch. Spectrum : M = mainstream only, M + = mainstream plus a few adjacent targets, Wide = reaches esoteric or constrained-execution targets. Oracle : unit tests, repo test suite, binary build-passes, or cardinal external performance. “This paper” is the only row combining System-scope construction with a Wide spectrum and an external cardinal oracle. Benchmark / study Task #Langs Spectrum Oracle HumanEval Chen et al. (2021) Func. 1 M unit tests MBPP Austin et al. (2021) Func. 1 M unit tests LiveCodeBench Jain et al. (2024) Func. 1 M unit tests MultiPL-E Cassano et al. (2023) Func. 22 M+ unit tests HumanEval-XL Peng et al. (2024) Func. 12 M+ unit tests CRUXEval-X Xu et al. (2025) Reason 19 M+ reference behaviour SWE-bench family Jimenez et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2025a); Badertdinov et al. (2025) Issue 1–2 M repo tests Multi-SWE-bench Zan et al. (2025) Issue 7 M repo tests Aider Polyglot Gauthier (2024) Edit 6 M Exercism tests DevBench Li et al. (2024a) Lifecycle few M mixed Commit0 Zhao et al. (2024) Repo (fill) 1 (Python) M repo tests DevEval Li et al. (2024b) Repo (gen) 1 (Python) M repo tests Endoh Endoh (2026) Small task 13 M+ unit tests Carlini/Anthropic compiler Carlini and Anthropic (2026) System 1 (Rust) M binary (Linux boots) METR time-horizon study Kwa et al. (2026) Mixed — M+ auto + human time-baseline ProgramBench Yang et al. (2026) System (recover) any M 248k auto-fuzzed tests     

> This paper System 15 Wide cardinal Elo + perft

That trade-off matches the form of the headline claims, which are existence claims: agent A produced a working engine with feature set F at strength E in language 

L, and a single successful session establishes such a claim. Besides, the repetition we do have operates at two levels. Every canonical Elo value aggregates hundreds of repeated games with confidence intervals, and the one controlled session-level retry, 

chess-purec (Section E.10), quantifies how much a single session-level variable can matter, since changing only the reward signal moved externally measured strength from 1415 ± 65 Elo to 1798 ± 82 Elo. 

10 Related work 

Positioning at a glance. Table 7 places the present study against the major evaluation paradigms for LLM-generated code. Three dimensions matter for our question. (i) Task granularity : whether the agent synthesises a function, repairs a single issue, edits an existing file, or designs and builds a complete system from a blank slate. (ii) Language spectrum : how many languages, and whether coverage extends beyond mainstream general-purpose targets. (iii) Oracle family : whether correctness is checked by a pre-written test suite, a binary build-passes criterion, or an external language-agnostic performance oracle. To our knowledge, the combination of full-system construction, a 15-language spectrum that reaches strictly esoteric targets, and a cardinal external performance oracle is not matched by any prior work. Individual dimensions are each well studied, but not together. We read Table 7 as a map of adjacent regimes, not a ranking. 

Code evaluation benchmarks. The dominant paradigm uses bounded, unit-test-graded tasks: function-level synthesis (HumanEval Chen et al. (2021), MBPP Austin et al. (2021), LiveCodeBench Jain et al. (2024)), repository-level issue repair on Python (SWE-bench Jimenez et al. (2024) and its family SWE-bench Multimodal Yang et al. (2025a), SWE-smith Yang et al. (2025b), SWE-rebench Badertdinov et al. (2025)), and the lifecycle-broadest entry DevBench Li et al. (2024a). The task is bounded, the oracle is a pre-written test suite, and the language is fixed. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 41 

Coding-agent architectures. Li et al. Li et al. (2025) frame this generation of tools as SE 3.0, in which autonomous coding agents work as teammates under human supervision. SWE-agent Yang et al. (2024) established the importance of agent-computer interfaces. AutoCodeRover Zhang et al. (2024) adds AST-aware search and fault-localisation. Agentless Xia et al. (2024) shows simpler localise →repair →validate pipelines can match richer orchestration. RepoCoder Zhang et al. (2023) introduces iterative retrieval-generation loops for repository completion. USEagent Applis et al. (2025) examines when patching scaffolds become “AI software engineers”. Riddell et al. Riddell et al. (2026) characterise the reasoning failures of LLM agents performing root-cause analysis in cloud systems. 

Multi-agent frameworks and long-horizon construction. Role-decomposed multi-agent frameworks (ChatDev Qian et al. (2024), MetaGPT Hong et al. (2024), Open-Hands OpenHands Community (2024)) demonstrate prototype-scale end-to-end software artefacts. The closest from-scratch system-construction precedent is Carlini and Anthropic’s parallel-Claudes experiment Carlini and Anthropic (2026): 16 Claude instances collaborating through git built a dependency-free Rust C compiler boot-strapping Linux 6.9. 

Long-horizon agent capability. The METR time-horizon study Kwa et al. (2026) measures the same frontier-agent capability we exploit, on an orthogonal axis: how long a realistic software-style task an autonomous agent can complete with 50% reliability against 800 + human baselines, reporting an ≈7-month doubling of the frontier 50%-time-horizon. The parallel MirrorCode Adamczewski et al. (2026) effort from Epoch AI extends the long-horizon claim from hours to weeks-scale coding tasks. They calibrate the long-horizon autonomy that makes our question well-posed: once agents reliably handle multi-hour software tasks, asking which programming language the agent should use becomes empirically tractable. We hold the domain fixed (chess engines) and vary the language. METR/MirrorCode hold the language paradigm fixed and vary task duration, making the two lines of work complementary rather than competing. 

From-scratch system reconstruction (complementary). A natural complement to our paper is ProgramBench Yang et al. (2026) (Meta/Stanford/Harvard, May 2026): agents must rebuild 200 existing programs ( FFmpeg , SQLite , PHP , . . . ) from binary +

documentation alone (internet and original source blocked, execute-only permissions on the gold binary), scored by ∼248 ,000 auto-fuzzed behavioural tests. The best frontier model fully resolves 0/200 tasks and clears 95% of tests on only 3% of tasks. The two studies attack the same from-scratch construction problem from opposite ends. ProgramBench hides the specification (the agent must recover behavior from a binary), leaves the implementation language to the agent (which uniformly picks one mainstream compiled target), and runs under an adversarial sandbox (no internet, no source repository, judge-watched, $9 per-task budget) engineered to control source leakage. Our paper inverts all three: the specification is publicly canonical and backed by strong external oracles (the rules of chess, plus perft and Elo), the program is held fixed and the language is varied across 17 PLs so that polyglot from-scratch construction becomes the dependent variable, and the corpus is built in a naturalistic 

setting (open internet, multi-prompt sessions, organic human supervision) that mirrors how developers actually use coding agents today. The source leakage ProgramBench’s 42 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

sandbox engineers away is therefore exactly what our four-signal novelty audit (Section 5.2) characterises in the wild. ProgramBench and our paper both extend the earlier single-language from-scratch benchmarks, Commit0 Zhao et al. (2024) (54 Python library skeletons, fill-in-the-blanks against the original test suite) and DevEval Li et al. (2024b) (manually-annotated Python repository-level generation), in different directions: hidden-spec generality vs. known-spec polyglot reach. 

Polyglot capability of coding agents. Code-LLMs are trained on hundreds of languages (StarCoder2 Lozhkov et al. (2024) via The Stack v2 at 600+) but evaluations show large language-dependent gaps: MultiPL-E Cassano et al. (2023) (22 languages), HumanEval-X / CodeGeeX Zheng et al. (2023), HumanEval-XL Peng et al. (2024) (12 PLs). Cassano et al. (2024) report transfer-learning gains on low-resource languages. Cross-lingual transfer Baltaji et al. (2025) and CRUXEval-X Xu et al. (2025) document Python bias even in code reasoning, and Boruch-Gruszecki et al. (2026) use language-agnostic verifiers as a low-resource answer. Multi-SWE-bench Zan et al. (2025) and the parallel SWE-PolyBench Rashid et al. (2025) extend issue repair to several mainstream languages. Aider Polyglot Gauthier (2024) evaluates editing across six, and Endoh Endoh (2026) measures agent iteration cost across 13 languages on unit-test pass/fail. 

Benchmark quality and grey-literature critiques. Koohestani et al. Koohestani et al. (2025) consolidate 100 + SE benchmarks into a quality framework (task-fidelity, oracle quality, language coverage, contamination risk, reproducibility) and report systematic gaps. KatanaQuant’s grey-literature critique KatanaQuant (2025) contrasts an LLM-built Rust SQLite re-implementation against reference C SQLite, reports ∼20 ,000 ×

slowdowns, and argues that frontier LLMs are sycophantic plausibility-matchers (citing METR, GitClear, Mercury, BrokenMath, DORA 2024). 

Chess as a testbed for AI. Chess has been an AI testbed since Shannon Shannon (1950). Modern engines are hybrids of handcrafted evaluation and neural networks (AlphaZero Silver et al. (2017), NNUE Nasu (2018)). This maturity cuts both ways: reference engines and chess libraries abound, so a from-scratch claim cannot be taken on faith. We therefore audited the novelty of every engine in the corpus, with the four-signal audit method described in Section 3.2, the accompanying supervision protocol in Section 3.5, and the results reported in Section 5.2. Table 7 summarises our study positioning. To our knowledge, no prior work com-bines from-scratch multi-component system construction with a language spectrum that reaches strictly esoteric targets together with an external performance oracle. 

11 Discussion, conclusion, and future work 

Programming languages (PLs) still matter to your AI coding agent teammate, but the way they matter has shifted, and that shift is the empirical contribution of this paper. With frontier coding-agent teammates, every PL in our taxonomy turned out to host a working chess engine, including languages no human had ever publicly used to build one. The corpus contains, to our knowledge, the first chess engines of comparable scope ever written in pure-TeX, pure-CSS, APL, Icon, Lean 4, and Why3/Rocq, plus an x86-64 uci assembly engine without an open-source predecessor we could identify, Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 43 

and Brainfuck and COBOL engines well beyond any prior hobby artefact in those languages. This is more than a quantitative extension of the polyglot evaluation literature Cassano et al. (2023); Zan et al. (2025); Gauthier (2024). It is a separate empirical statement that long-tail and supposedly unsuited PLs have stopped being a coverage barrier for AI-teammate-built non-trivial systems. Niche-language and legacy-rewrite scenarios previously dismissed as uneconomic become now an option. The box below recapitulates the findings behind this answer. 

Findings at a glance 

– Polyglot coverage. Frontier agents produce working engines across all five language categories (mainstream, specialised, domain-specific, legacy, esoteric). 

– Ceiling, not destiny. Within the same PL, engines produced by different agents or sessions land hundreds of Elo rating apart. Language sets a loose upper bound and feature-set/oracle-rigor decisions move the engine under it ( RQ2 , RQ4 ). 

– Genuine synthesis, no copy. 27 of the 29 main-corpus engines pass a four-signal novelty audit (no engine-core library import, no canonical fingerprint, no self-reported copy claim). Feature-level analysis on quiescence, transposition tables, and evaluation shows a shared canonical skeleton with substantial sub-feature and PL-idiomatic divergence rather than textual copy ( RQ2 ). 

– Agents wire up their own validation, without being asked. Move-generation correctness checks ( perft ) and strength-test games against Stockfish appear within the first one or two developer–agent exchanges of the typical session ( RQ3 ). 

– Self-evaluation is biased upward. Most agents’ in-loop self-Elo overestimates the externally measured Elo by 200 Elo to 1100 Elo, a weakness of the benchmarking setup the agents converge to on their own, with a magnitude that varies from engines and PLs. Every per-PL strength and cost figure in this paper therefore rests on our external, language-agnostic re-evaluation, and bringing that supervision into the agent’s own loop is where developers’ domain knowledge can pay off ( RQ3 –RQ5 ). 

– Cheating is real and language-shaped. A CSS engine that silently used 

python-chess backed by qualitative supervision, and a Brainfuck task with a tempting Python detour that the agent refused in the Claude Code session (the Codex Brainfuck session kept part of its logic in Python, Section F). Evasion is a language-constraint failure mode that needs explicit catching ( RQ3 ). 

– Strength scales with language category. The top tier (1900 Elo–2100 Elo) is mainstream-compiled only, the mid-band (1300 Elo–1700 Elo) mixes interpreted main-stream, formal-methods, legacy, and DSL engines, and the floor (<700 Elo or no measurable rating) is held by APL, SQL, and the markup engines. Academic/spe-cialised PLs (Lean 4, Why3, Rocq) follow a different curve: fast to a working engine, low ceiling on Elo ( RQ4 ). 

– Cost scales with oracle iteration, not LOC. Mainstream engines settle in a few prompts and tens of millions of tokens. Specialised, legacy, and esoteric engines need tens of prompts and hundreds of millions of tokens, with debugging dominating the tail (RQ5 ). 

11.1 What the language effect is, and is not Once every attempted PL proves reachable, the question becomes what matters when choosing one? . The corpus exposes four PL-correlated axes (ceiling Elo, cost multiplier, software-engineering workload shape, and verification affordance) and supplies worked examples of each. Two readings the data does not support deserve to be ruled out. 

Language does not determine Elo on its own: within the same language we see hundreds of Elo of variance (1509 Elo–2096 Elo in Java and 1723 Elo–1989 Elo in Rust on the external ruler, 550 Elo–1300 Elo in L ATEX on the engines’ own scales), 44 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

which we cannot decompose into deliberate feature selection versus session-level stochasticity (LLM sampling, sequential plan divergence). Nor are language and platform separable from one another: “language” here is shorthand for the full (language, compiler, optimisation flags, OS, CPU architecture) stack, part of what reads as a language effect may be a training-data fluency effect of the specific LLM (Section 9), and budget and benchmarking strategy add two more confounders that the corpus does not control. The better reading is output quality ≈ f(language ×

platform, feature set, oracle rigor, human steering, budget, session randomness) , with the factors correlated rather than independent. Within those caveats, the language ceiling is real and large. The search-throughput bench of RQ4 spans about two orders of magnitude, yet the Python engine still reaches the intermediate-club band ( ≈1600 Elo) while searching roughly 100 × slower than the fastest compiled engines, showing that algorithmic quality (aspiration windows, null-move pruning, transposition tables) substantially compensates for raw throughput within limits. The three-feature analysis of Sections 5.1.2 and 5.3 adds the structural lens: a convergent algorithmic skeleton, divergent per-PL idiom, and freely varying numerical constants, the strongest evidence that the agents reproduce algorithmic structure from a shared specification CPW while generating the data layer independently. 11.2 What the corpus does not reach: the gap to top-level engines 

None of the engines in this corpus reach the strength of top-level chess engines. The corpus ceiling sits at ∼2100 Elo, whereas a CCRL top-tier engine plays at 

∼3500+ Elo and Stockfish at full strength several hundred Elo above that. We see four compounding reasons and read this gap as a concrete future-work agenda. 

(i) Stopping policy. Sessions ended at a user-judged plateau under a reasonable budget, and we did not push for GM-strength play because that was not the experi-ment’s target. (ii) Prompting strategy. The canonical first prompt names “Elo rating” as a goal but not a target, and the typical follow-up is “improve the Elo” rather than “reach 2800 Elo”. Stronger incentives plausibly extract more strength per dollar, but we did not measure this. (iii) PL ceiling. Several languages (Brainfuck, LaTeX, CSS, SQL) sit well below top-tier strength under any budget. (iv) Top-tier engineering needs sustained expert interaction. A modern ∼3500+ Elo engine reflects decades of chess-engine knowledge (bitboard tricks, NNUE training, Syzygy tablebases, search-tree-shaping heuristics tuned over millions of self-play games) plus expert steering. Whether an AI teammate plus an expert can close the gap to top-tier engines is a worthy follow-up that our corpus does not answer. An important counter-point bounds the gap from below: the Phase-B anchor ladder includes Rustic Alpha 3.0.4 (CCRL 1820 Elo), a deliberately chosen non-strawman solid human-authored Rust engine. Two of our engines beat it head-to-head and several others close to within 100 Elo. The gap to GM-strength engines is real, but the gap to a competent human-built club engine is roughly closed. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 45 

11.3 Implications for practice For SE teams adopting AI coding teammates, three lessons stand out. Agents will wire up strong oracles autonomously when the domain admits them, so expect it and verify it: the in-loop self-Elo signal the agents optimise against can be methodologically biased, and that bias is the human teammate’s correction to refine. Capability-level prompts plus a handful of “improve” follow-ups go a long way, as the median main-corpus engine is built in 14 prompts (Table 1). And PL choice still earns its budget line: the agent does the work, but the human still chooses the medium, and a poor target multiplies cost and effort by orders of magnitude while capping reachable quality. A fourth lesson generalises the verification-affordance axis beyond the PL itself: in this corpus, the agents’ autonomous build-test-revise loop made verifiable progress because the domain supplied strong external oracles (Section 6). When deciding where to deploy a coding agent, asking “what can my domain check automatically?” is therefore at least as informative as asking how familiar the underlying LLM is with the domain and its languages. 11.4 Future work Three follow-up directions extend naturally, with the artefacts in place for each. First, controlled replications to separate PL effects from model mastery and session randomness: the six confounders catalogued in Section 9 specify exactly what such an experiment must hold fixed. The full factorial over those confounders is combinatorially large, and every cell is costly, since a single variant means a complete agent session plus a canonical re-evaluation. Designing replications that stay informative under a realistic budget is therefore a research challenge in itself, and our exploratory study opens it by indicating which factors appear to move outcomes most. Second, an open-weight and open-harness comparison . Our results were produced with closed-source frontier models ( Opus 4.6 /Opus 4.7 , gpt-5-codex /gpt-5.3-codex /gpt-5.4 ) at 

≈$2 ,100 canonical USD summed over the 23 main-corpus engines with recoverable cost data (Table 1, with vendor list prices discussed in Section 3.2). Do open-weight models (DeepSeek-Coder, Qwen-Coder, Llama-Coder) and open harnesses (OpenHands OpenHands Community (2024), Aider, SWE-agent) reach comparable polyglot coverage? Do they exploit oracles the same way, under comparable budgets? Our corpus and methodology provide a ready ground truth for that comparison. Third, cross-domain generalisation . Chess gave us three things that make the evidence comparable across languages: a non-trivial feature-rich system, a hierarchy of language-agnostic oracles, and a series of demanding software engineering tasks both agents consistently attempt. The same traits make chess a realistic complex case rather than a sanitised benchmark: Elo is noisy, reference engines drift across versions and hardware, domain knowledge is in play, and games cost compute. The next study need not be chess, however. Compilers, SQL query engines, regex engines, type checkers, cryptographic primitives, and constraint solvers all admit strong external oracles, would support the same style of study, and are natural candidates for the next generation of polyglot system-construction benchmarks, testing whether the “PL is one factor among several” reading holds beyond chess. 46 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

11.5 Concluding remarks We release 34 agent-built chess engines (29 main-corpus + 5 special-role) across 17 primary languages, per-engine evidence reports, the canonical re-evaluation harness (Section E), and a reproducible Python pipeline at https://github.com/acherm/ agentic-chessengine-metaanalysis (per-engine repositories listed in Section F). AI teammates have moved software construction one level up, from line-by-line authoring to capability-level steering, and the medium (the programming language) still shapes the message. This paper establishes that these language effects exist: the PL bounds the strength an agent-built system can reach and multiplies what it costs to build. We hope the corpus, protocol, and research questions of this paper will be revisited with diverse programming languages, open and next-generation coding agents, and from chess to other domains with strong external oracles. 

Data and code availability 

All data, scripts, and per-project reports used in this paper are released under a permissive license at: 

https://github.com/acherm/agentic-chessengine-metaanalysis 

The 34 per-engine repositories are also released individually under the same organisation ( github.com/acherm ). The full mapping from engine to repository URL is given in Section F. The artifact contains: 

– scripts/ : the Python pipeline (common.py , discover.py , extract_-sessions.py , per_project_report.py , elo_and_perft.py , extract_elo.py ,

synthesis.py ), 

– data/ : machine-readable appendices (overview.json , synthesis.json ,

elo.json , novelty.json , prompt_protocol.json , projects/<name>.json ), 

– reports/ : the per-project reports (45 Markdown files), the cross-project synthesis, and four qualitative deep dives. 

Session transcripts. Interaction data is released in two forms. The per-engine mea-surements (prompts, tokens, costs, tool use, and trajectories) are released as the committed data/ JSON snapshot, extracted on 2026-04-20 by the released scripts, which is the canonical record of Claude Code interaction for this corpus. The raw 

Codex session rollouts are released as well, with personally identifying information redacted. Per-session provenance notes are included in the artefact. 

Use of large language models 

LLMs play three roles in this work. They are the object of study (Section 2.1). They assisted the analysis: the extraction pipeline, the evaluation harness, and the statistical scripts were written with Claude Code assistance and reviewed by the authors, and every published number is computed by that released code rather than by LLM judgement (Section 3.2, Section G). They assisted the writing: the manuscript was drafted and edited with Claude Code (Anthropic Opus 4.x -family and Fable 5 Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 47 

models, 2026-04 to 2026-06) under detailed author direction. The authors reviewed and revised all generated text, verified the factual claims against the released data, and take full responsibility for the content. A self-assessment against the reporting checklist of the community guidelines for LLM studies (Baltes et al., 2025) is given in Section H. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is supported by the Inria Défi LLM4Code (https://project.inria.fr/ llm4code/ ). 

Conflicts of interest 

The authors declare no conflicts of interest. In particular, the authors have no financial, employment, or contractual relationship with OpenAI or Anthropic, the providers of the coding-agent models (Codex / GPT-5-codex family and Claude Code / Opus 4.6/4.7) used to build the corpus. 

References 

Chess Programming Wiki. https://www.chessprogramming.org/ . Accessed: 2026. M. Acher. BFChess: A chess engine in brainfuck, built by a coding agent. https: //blog.mathieuacher.com/BFChessChessEngineBrainfuck/ , Mar. 2026a. Blog post; qualitative source coded in the paper’s qualitative triangulation pilot. M. Acher. TeXCCChess: How coding agents wrote a chess engine in pure TeX. 

https://blog.mathieuacher.com/TeXCCChessEngine/ , Feb. 2026b. Blog post; qualitative source coded in the paper’s qualitative triangulation pilot. M. Acher and Claude Code. ChessCSS: A chess engine in CSS. https://github.com/ acherm/agentic-chessengine-css-ChessCSS , 2026. 55k CSS rules, ≈340 lines of JS; 31 commits of progressive JS →CSS migration (2026-02-27 to 2026-03-03). T. Adamczewski, D. Rein, D. Owen, and F. Brand. MirrorCode: Evidence AI can already do some weeks-long coding tasks. Epoch AI blog, https://epoch.ai/ blog/mirrorcode-preliminary-results , 2026. Companion piece to METR’s time-horizon work, extending the long-horizon claim from hours to weeks-scale autonomous coding tasks. L. Applis, Y. Zhang, S. Liang, N. Jiang, L. Tan, and A. Roychoudhury. Unified software engineering agent as AI software engineer, 2025. arXiv:2506.14683. J. Austin, A. Odena, M. Nye, et al. Program synthesis with large language models, 2021. arXiv:2108.07732. I. Badertdinov, A. Golubev, M. Nekrashevich, A. Shevtsov, et al. SWE-rebench: An automated pipeline for task collection and decontaminated evaluation of software engineering agents, 2025. arXiv:2505.20411. R. Baltaji, S. Pujar, L. Mandel, M. Hirzel, L. Buratti, and L. Varshney. Cross-lingual transfer in programming languages: An extensive empirical study. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) , 2025. 48 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

S. Baltes, F. Angermeir, C. Arora, M. Muñoz Barón, C. Chen, L. Böhme, F. Calefato, N. Ernst, D. Falessi, B. Fitzgerald, D. Fucci, J. He, C. Treude, M. Kalinowski, S. Lambiase, D. Russo, M. Lungu, C. Martinez Montes, L. Prechelt, P. Ralph, R. van Tonder, and S. Wagner. Guidelines for empirical studies in software engineering involving large language models, 2025. arXiv:2508.15503. Living guidelines and reporting checklist at https://llm-guidelines.org/ , version 2026.06. A. Boruch-Gruszecki, Y. Zi, Z. Wu, T. Oberoi, C. J. Anderson, J. Biswas, and A. Guha. Agnostics: Learning to synthesize code in any programming language with a universal reinforcement learning environment. In ICLR , 2026. N. Carlini and Anthropic. Building a C compiler with a team of parallel Claudes. 

https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-c-compiler , 2026. Engi-neering blog post with open repository; ≈100k LOC, Linux 6.9 bootable, ≈$20k API spend. F. Cassano, J. Gouwar, D. Nguyen, S. Nguyen, L. Phipps-Costin, D. Pinckney, M.-H. Yee, Y. Zi, C. J. Anderson, M. Q. Feldman, A. Guha, M. Greenberg, and A. Jangda. MultiPL-E: A scalable and polyglot approach to benchmarking neural code generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 2023. F. Cassano, J. Gouwar, F. Lucchetti, C. Schlesinger, A. Freeman, C. J. Anderson, M. Q. Feldman, M. Greenberg, A. Jangda, and A. Guha. Knowledge transfer from high-resource to low-resource programming languages for code LLMs. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (OOPSLA) , 2024. M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code, 2021. arXiv:2107.03374. Y. Endoh. Which programming language is best for Claude Code? https://dev. to/mame/which-programming-language-is-best-for-claude-code-508a ,2026. Controlled agent benchmark across 13 languages; raw data at 

https://github.com/mame/ai-coding-lang-bench .P. Gauthier. Aider polyglot benchmark. https://aider.chat/docs/ leaderboards/ , 2024. 225 Exercism exercises across C++, Go, Java, JavaScript, Python, Rust; multi-language code-editing leaderboard. S. Hong, M. Zhuge, J. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. K. S. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou, C. Ran, L. Xiao, C. Wu, and J. Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In ICLR ,2024. N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W.-D. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang, S. Wang, A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, and I. Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code, 2024. arXiv:2403.07974. C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. Narasimhan. SWE-Bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In ICLR , 2024. KatanaQuant. Your LLM doesn’t write correct code. https://blog.katanaquant. com/p/your-llm-doesnt-write-correct-code , 2025. Grey literature; case study contrasting an LLM-built Rust re-implementation of SQLite (Turso/Limbo) against the reference C SQLite, reporting performance gaps of 20,000 × on primary-key lookups and arguing that LLMs are sycophantic plausibility-matchers rather than correctness-producers; cites METR, GitClear, Mercury, BrokenMath, Google DORA 2024. R. Koohestani, P. de Bekker, B. Koç, and M. Izadi. Benchmarking AI models in software engineering: A review, search tool, and unified approach for elevating benchmark quality, 2025. arXiv:2503.05860v3; consolidated review of 100 + SE Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 49 

benchmarks with a multidimensional benchmark-quality framework (task-fidelity, oracle quality, language coverage, contamination risk, reproducibility) and a search tool for benchmark discovery. T. Kwa, B. West, J. Becker, A. Deng, K. Garcia, M. Hasin, S. Jawhar, M. Kinniment, N. Rush, S. Von Arx, R. Bloom, T. Broadley, H. Du, B. Goodrich, N. Jurkovic, L. H. Miles, S. Nix, T. Lin, N. Parikh, D. Rein, L. J. K. Sato, H. Wijk, D. M. Ziegler, E. Barnes, and L. Chan. Measuring AI ability to complete long software tasks, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14499 . METR; 50%-time-horizon metric calibrated against 800 + human baselines (HCAST, RE-Bench, SWAA); reports ∼7-month doubling of the frontier agent’s autonomous task-completion length. B. Li, W. Wu, Z. Tang, L. Shi, J. Yang, et al. DevBench: A comprehensive benchmark for software development, 2024a. arXiv:2403.08604 (v1 title; later versions retitled “Prompting Large Language Models to Tackle the Full Software Development Lifecycle”). H. Li, H. Zhang, and A. E. Hassan. The rise of AI teammates in software engineering (SE) 3.0: How autonomous coding agents are reshaping software engineering, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.15003 . arXiv:2507.15003. J. Li, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu, H. Zhu, L. Wang, K. Liu, Z. Fang, L. Wang, J. Ding, X. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Dong, Z. Jin, B. Li, F. Huang, and Y. Li. DevEval: A manually-annotated code generation benchmark aligned with real-world code repos-itories, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19856 . Manually-annotated repository-level Python code generation; sister effort to Commit0/DevBench. A. Lozhkov, R. Li, L. B. Allal, F. Cassano, J. Lamy-Poirier, et al. StarCoder 2 and The Stack v2: The next generation, 2024. arXiv:2402.19173; StarCoder2-15B trained on 600+ languages from The Stack v2. E. Musk. [Public remark on the future of programming]. Post on X (for-merly Twitter), 8:45 AM, Feb 10, 2026, https://x.com/elonmusk/status/ 2021128401831199215 , 2026. “Code itself will go away in favor of just making the binary directly.” Used here as an exemplar of the popular “code obsolescence” framing. Y. Nasu. Efficiently updatable neural-network-based evaluation functions for computer shogi, 2018. Initial NNUE proposal; later adapted to chess. OpenHands Community. OpenHands: An open platform for AI software developers as generalist agents. https://github.com/OpenHands/OpenHands , 2024. Open-source coding-agent platform; 76k+ GitHub stars as of June 2026. Q. Peng, Y. Chai, and X. Li. HumanEval-XL: A multilingual code generation benchmark for cross-lingual natural language generalization. In LREC-COLING ,2024. C. Qian, W. Liu, H. Liu, N. Chen, Y. Dang, J. Li, C. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Su, X. Cong, J. Xu, D. Li, Z. Liu, and M. Sun. ChatDev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024. M. S. Rashid, C. Bock, Y. Zhuang, A. Buchholz, T. Esler, S. Valentin, L. Franceschi, M. Wistuba, P. T. Sivaprasad, W. J. Kim, et al. SWE-PolyBench: A multi-language benchmark for repository-level evaluation of coding agents, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08703 . Multi-language extension of SWE-bench-style repository-level issue repair; parallel effort to Multi-SWE-bench. 50 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

E. Riddell, J. Riddell, G. Sun, M. Antkiewicz, and K. Czarnecki. Stalled, biased, and confused: Uncovering reasoning failures in LLMs for cloud-based root cause analysis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on AI Foundation Models and Soft-ware Engineering (FORGE) , 2026. Co-located with ICSE 2026; arXiv:2601.22208. C. E. Shannon. Xxii. programming a computer for playing chess. Philosophical Magazine , 41(314):256–275, 1950. D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, et al. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. In arXiv:1712.01815 , 2017. C. S. Xia, Y. Deng, S. Dunn, and L. Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying LLM-based software engineering agents, 2024. arXiv:2407.01489. R. Xu et al. CRUXEval-X: A benchmark for multilingual code reasoning, under-standing, and execution. In ACL , 2025. J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao, K. Narasimhan, and O. Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. L. Zhang, K. Lieret, et al. SWE-bench multimodal: Do AI systems generalize to visual software domains? In ICLR , 2025a. J. Yang, K. Lieret, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, et al. SWE-smith: Scaling data for software engineering agents, 2025b. arXiv preprint. J. Yang, K. Lieret, J. Ma, P. Thakkar, D. Pedchenko, S. Sootla, E. McMilin, P. Yin, R. Hou, G. Synnaeve, D. Yang, and O. Press. ProgramBench: Can language models rebuild programs from scratch? arXiv:2605.03546 (Meta Superintelligence Labs / Stanford / Harvard), May 2026; leaderboard: https://programbench.com/ ;code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/ProgramBench , 2026. 200 reverse-engineering tasks (e.g., FFmpeg , SQLite , PHP ); agent must rebuild a program from binary + documentation alone, no internet, no original source; ∼248 ,000 auto-fuzzed behavioral tests; best frontier model (Claude Opus 4.7) fully resolves 0/200 and clears 95% of tests on 3% of tasks. D. Zan et al. Multi-SWE-bench: A multilingual benchmark for issue resolving, 2025. arXiv:2504.02605; 1,632 curated instances across 7 languages. F. Zhang, B. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Keung, J. Liu, D. Zan, Y. Mao, J.-G. Lou, and W. Chen. RepoCoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and generation, 2023. arXiv:2303.12570. Y. Zhang, H. Ruan, Z. Fan, and A. Roychoudhury. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) , 2024. W. Zhao, N. Jiang, C. Lee, J. T. Chiu, C. Cardie, M. Gallé, and A. M. Rush. Commit0: Library generation from scratch, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01769 .54 Python libraries converted into task instances by erasing function/class imple-mentations; agent fills the skeleton, scored by the repository’s original test suite. Early “from-scratch” benchmark in the lineage that ProgramBench and our paper extend. Q. Zheng, X. Xia, X. Zou, Y. Dong, S. Wang, Y. Xue, et al. CodeGeeX: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual benchmarking on HumanEval-X. In 

KDD , 2023. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 51 

A Corpus supplement: additional figures and the novelty audit 

This appendix collects views referenced from the main text that we kept out of the body to control figure and table count. Section A.1 reproduces the agent-claimed Elo trajectories cited in RQ4 , Section A.2 reproduces the per-engine novelty audit cited in RQ2 , and Section A.3 reproduces the round-robin-vs-anchor Elo scatterplot cited in RQ4 .

A.1 Agent-claimed Elo trajectories during a session 

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1

0

500 

1,000 

1,500 

2,000 

2,500 

Session progress (step index / total steps) 

> Agent-claimed Elo (from assistant text)
> domain-specific / markup
> esoteric
> legacy
> mainstream general-purpose
> specialized / academic

Fig. 4 Agent-claimed Elo over normalised session progress, for engines with at least two Elo mentions in their transcripts. One polyline per engine, with colour and marker shape by language category. Dashed polylines mark zigzag trajectories (an Elo claim that dropped then recovered within the session, Section 7). The mainstream general-purpose engines cluster near the top, rise monotonically, and cap around 2000 Elo–2200 Elo. The legacy and domain-specific cells plateau at 1000 Elo–1600 Elo, and the esoteric row sits at the bottom. The zigzag engines are the ones where the agent caught and rolled back a regression mid-session, a supervision signal that costs tokens but prevents strength loss. Figure 4 shows the five qualitative shapes of agent-claimed Elo curves discussed in Section 7. Mainstream general-purpose engines cluster near the top, legacy and domain-specific cells plateau in the middle, and the esoteric row sits at the bottom. Dashed polylines mark the zigzag trajectories that signal a within-session regression-and-rollback, the supervision signal we discuss in RQ4 (Section 7) and RQ5 (Section 8.2). 

A.2 Per-engine novelty audit 

Table 8 reports the four-signal novelty audit per engine cited from Section 5.2: class ( scratch ,

lib-asst , fp-match , copy-claim ), engine-core import and fingerprint hits, tooling-only library dependencies, and counts of strong (“ported from”/“adapt from”) and weak (“inspired by”, “based on”) transcript references to canonical engines. Headline buckets are summarised inline at Section 5.2. The table here lets a reviewer audit any engine cell directly. 52 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 8 RQ3 Novelty evidence, per engine. ‘Class.’ is our classification. “Scratch” means the engine-core files contain no chess-library import, no canonical-engine fingerprint, and no self-reported copy claim. “Lib-asst” means the engine core imports an external chess library. “Fp-match” means a distinctive fingerprint (e.g., python-chess API surface) appears inside the engine core. “Copy-claim” means the transcript contains explicit authorship language (“ported from X”, “adapt from X”, . . . ). ‘Core imp.’ and ‘Core fp.’ are the engine-core-only evidence streams (test/harness files are scored separately). ‘Tool dep.’ flags a chess library used only in the evaluation tooling. ‘Strong’ and ‘Weak’ are counts of transcript mentions of canonical engines (“adapt from”/“port from” vs. “like”/“based on”).                                                                                                                                                                                            

> Engine Lang. Class. Core imp. Core fp. Tool dep. Strong Weak chess-apl-codex54 APL scratch ——02chess-assembly-codex Assembly scratch ——✓00chess-brainfuck Brainfuck scratch ——✓00chess-brainfuck-cc Brainfuck scratch ——✓02chess-purec Cscratch ——01chess-purec-codex Cscratch ——00chess-cplusplus-claude C++ scratch ——01cplusplus-chess C++ scratch ——08COBOL-chess COBOL scratch ——011 chess-cobol-cc COBOL scratch ——00chess-css-codex CSS/HTML fingerprint-match python: import chess python-chess API surface ✓00chess-css-codex-guided CSS/HTML scratch ——00chess-icon-codex Icon scratch ——00chess-java Java scratch ——00chess-java-cc Java scratch ——00chess-latex-codex-replication LaTeX scratch ——00latex-chess-engine LaTeX (TeX) scratch ——✓00lean-chess Lean 4 scratch ——00chess-py Python scratch ——03chess-py-cc Python scratch ——01chess-Rocq Rocq →OCaml scratch ——01chess-ruby-cc Ruby scratch ——00chess-ruby-codex Ruby scratch ——00chess-rust-cc Rust scratch ——02chess-rust-cc-redo Rust scratch ——01chess-rust-codex Rust library-assisted rust: chess crate —✓00chess-sql SQL scratch ——00chess-why3-cc Why3 →OCaml scratch ——00chess-why3 Why3 →OCaml scratch ——00

The four signals, in detail. (1) Manifest dependencies : parse requirements.txt ,

pyproject.toml , Cargo.toml , Gemfile , package.json , pom.xml , build.gradle , go.mod for known chess libraries ( python-chess , sunfish , chess.js , shakmaty , cozy-chess , the Rust 

chess crate, chesspresso , . . . ). (2) Source-level imports : grep source files for imports of any of those libraries. (3) Canonical-engine fingerprints : a hand-curated catalogue of distinctive constants (Sunfish piece values, python-chess API surface, chess.js PIECE_SYMBOLS , the TSCP #define block). (4) Transcript authorship claims : mine Claude Code and Codex 

transcripts for strong patterns (“ported from”, “translated from”) and weak patterns (“inspired by”, “based on”) followed by a canonical-engine name. 

Engine-core vs. tooling files. A recurrent false positive in our first pass was python-chess 

imported by engines whose primary language is not Python: the agent uses it in a test harness or PGN converter ( play_stockfish.py , pgn2latex.py ). A dependency used only for evaluation tooling is not evidence the engine is library-assisted. We therefore split every import or fingerprint hit by whether its file sits in an engine-core path ( src/ , lib/ , project root) or a tooling path, and only engine-core hits determine the bucket. 

Fingerprint catalogue limits. The fingerprint catalogue is deliberately small and hand-curated. We do not claim exhaustive coverage. A future pass will add locality-sensitive hashing over distinctive integer constants and identifier-ngram Jaccard similarity against a vendored corpus of canonical engines. 

Regex limits for unusual syntaxes. The feature scan in Section 5.1 relies on regex patterns over source text. Brainfuck is a known weak spot: the compiled 5.6 MB chess.bf does not expose identifiers like “castling” or “en passant” (those live only in the Python code generator), so the Brainfuck rows under-report. LaTeX engines, where chess concepts are spelled out in macro names, report cleanly. We treat zeros in unusual-syntax rows as “not detected” rather than “not implemented” and cross-reference the per-engine reports before making a claim. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 53 

A.3 Round-robin vs anchor Elo scatterplot 

Fig. 5 Round-robin Elo (Bradley-Terry MLE) versus Phase B anchor-based Elo (inverse-variance combination of the calibrated external references). The round-robin pool is 650 head-to-head games over 325 pairs among the 26 UCI-conformant main-corpus engines plus a slow-engine sub-pass (71 further games over 12 pairs vs. chess-brainfuck , chess-sql , and 

latex-chess-engine ). The scatter plots the n = 24 engines for which both rulers are available. Filled markers: engines with at least one unsaturated anchor pair. Open markers: engines whose anchor-based Elo is a saturation floor only (the agent’s measurement methodology provides no resolution below ∼1500 Elo so they pile up at the floor). The dashed line is y = x. Pearson 

r = 0 .94 on the measured-only subset ( n = 12 ). Pearson r = 0 .84 , Spearman ρ = 0 .84 across all 

n = 24 engines plotted. Discussion of the agreement and disagreement patterns is in Section E.4. 

B Method details 

This appendix collects the methodology paragraphs that would otherwise inflate §3 and break the reading flow. Cross-references from the body point here when a reader needs the exact pipeline behind a number cited in the RQ sections. 

B.1 Repository classification 

Language attribution uses file-extension counts: the primary language of an engine is the code-language (excluding Markdown, JSON, YAML, and TOML) with the highest LOC. Vendored third-party trees ( cutechess-cli/ , stockfish/ , fairy-stockfish/ , bundled opponent-engine source trees under tests/engines/ ) are excluded from LOC and language counts to avoid attributing benchmarking-infrastructure code to the engine itself. 54 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

B.2 Feature-level cross-engine analysis pipeline 

The file-level feature scan (Section 5) records whether a pattern such as quiescence|qsearch 

appears anywhere in a project, giving one bit per feature per engine. To move from presence to depth (which optimisations were implemented, how the algorithm was adapted to the target language), we built a deeper pipeline around two scripts. 

feature_locator.py –hotspot . For a named feature (e.g. “Transposition table”), the locator searches all source files for matching lines and scores each match by: keyword-in-function-name (+20), line-is-a-function-definition (+12), search-adjacent file (+6), keyword-in-line (+3), test-file penalty ( −25). The highest-scoring match becomes the anchor . A language-aware bound-ary extractor walks outward to recover the enclosing function body. Eleven language families are handled: brace-counting (C/C++/Java/Rust), indentation (Python), keyword/end (Ruby/I-con), let rec (OCaml/Why3), Fixpoint /Definition (Coq/Rocq), def /partial def (Lean 4), paragraph names (COBOL), assembly labels, and ∇. . . ∇ delimiters (APL). A secondary stem scan (e.g. quiesc from quiescence ) catches function names that match algorithmically but not lexically. 

feature_compare.py . Given the per-engine hotspot JSON, the comparator applies 13 algorithmically motivated sub-feature regexes to each extracted snippet and produces (i) a sub-feature presence matrix ( ✓/· per engine × sub-feature), (ii) pairwise token-Jaccard (bag-of-normalised-tokens, language keywords filtered), and (iii) pairwise feature-Jaccard (Jaccard over the 13-dimensional binary sub-feature vector). Token-Jaccard measures lexical proximity. Feature-Jaccard measures algorithmic proximity, independent of surface syntax. 

Three features, one triad. We applied this pipeline to three features chosen to form a complete cross-section of a chess engine. Quiescence search is a search algorithm concentrated in one function (the pattern fires in 28 of the scan’s 36 targets, the corpus engines plus three canonical reference engines, and the hotspot extractor recovers a valid function body for 26 of those 28). Transposition table is a data structure distributed across initialisation, class definition, and probe/store call sites (21 valid extractions out of 24 pattern matches). Evaluation/PST is further fragmented across constants file, evaluate() function, and incremental update hooks (the highest extraction failure rate, ≈47%, with 10 valid extractions out of 19 matches). Raw artefacts are in reports/features/ . Per-feature narratives are in QUIESCE/TT/EVAL_FEATURE_-ANALYSIS.md and synthesised in FEATURE_ANALYSIS_REPORT.md in the replication artefact. 

B.3 SE-activity coding frame 

The 10 activity categories used throughout the paper were induced from the trajectory data rather than imposed a priori. Starting point was the per-step record assembled by the two-pass protocol (Section 3.2): user prompt, tool calls, bash commands, files written, files edited, and (for Claude Code ) user-intent heuristics. We inspected a stratified sample of sessions and iteratively merged and split candidate categories until the resulting set satisfied four constraints: (i) grounded in concrete trajectory evidence, (ii) language-agnostic, (iii) orthogonal enough to be informative while permitting genuine overlap (a debugging step that edits a file is both 

debugging and implementation ), and (iv) covering, with fewer than 3% of steps in the stratified sample carrying no tag. An initial 13-category draft was revised after auditing showed that 

implementation was too narrowly tagged (“new source file with a recognised extension” missed most coding activity, since agents do most work through edits) and that protocol-engineering, refactoring, and requirements-spec splits were not reliably separable. The revised frame merges them into implementation and design . The full rule set lives in the replication artefact as 

scripts/se_capabilities.py .

Per-step tagging rules. The coder is deterministic, runs against the structured per-step record, and assigns each step zero or more tags. Each category has one to three evidence sources: a filename regex (e.g. the testing category fires on /tests?/ paths or test_* /*_test.* stems), a bash-kind filter (e.g. benchmarking & evaluation fires on cutechess /stockfish invocations), a user-intent heuristic, or a user-prompt vocabulary regex. A step can carry multiple tags. The coder does not count LOC or weight tags. Each firing contributes a single event. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 55 

Likert intensity scale. Per-engine session length spans two orders of magnitude (one-shot prompt-and-go to 192-step Brainfuck iterations), so raw event counts are not directly comparable. We summarise each engine as a 10-dimensional intensity profile using a 4-level ordinal scale on the share of the session tagged with each capability: absent (0 events), light (•: one event regardless of session length, or share ≤ 5%), moderate (•• : share in (5%, 20%]), and heavy 

(• • • : share > 20%). The thresholds are coarse by design. 

Scope and limits. The frame gives three derived measures: coverage (whether an engine ever exercised a capability), breadth (how many of the 10 categories an engine exercised), and intensity (the Likert score per category per engine). None measures correctness or value. Tagging is also heuristic and under-counts engines whose primary transcripts are archived (Section B.9). 

B.4 Qualitative triangulation pilot 

To complement the quantitative evidence with sourced qualitative material, we ran a small structured coding pilot over two author-authored blog posts on specific corpus engines Acher (2026b,a), using a nine-code frame tied to the paper’s RQs (three codes per RQ-cluster). 33 excerpts (15 TeX, 18 Brainfuck) were extracted, and 8 of 9 codes saturate across both sources. The frame, coded excerpts, and code ×source frequency matrix are in the replication artefact (Data and code availability). Inter-rater reliability is not yet established (single coder), and we position the pilot as complementary evidence rather than a primary finding. 

B.5 The Chess Engine Feature Explorer (web tool) 

To support the qualitative side of the feature analysis we built a small web tool, Chess Engine Feature Explorer , that browses the per-engine hotspots and compares variants side by side. The tool was used during the qualitative analysis to inspect sub-feature differences across PLs, specifically to check, per feature, where two engines share a sub-feature and where they diverge. The live tool is hosted at https://blog.mathieuacher.com/ agentic-chessengine-metaanalysis/reports/features/feature_explorer.html and the dedicated quiescence-art view (constellation laid out around the canonical CPW pseudocode) at 

https://blog.mathieuacher.com/agentic-chessengine-metaanalysis/reports/features/ quiescence_art_advanced.html . Both are also released with the replication artefact alongside the per-feature JSON. Figure 6 (left panel) shows the specification view : 28 engine variants laid out on a constel-lation, with the canonical CPW-style quiescence pseudocode in the centre and the agent-built variants floating around it. Clicking any two cards opens a side-by-side comparison. Figure 7 shows the compare view : a Java vs. Rust pair ( chess-java-cc vs. chess-rust-codex ) with the 13 sub-feature tags rendered as chips at the top of each panel and the underlying source code below. The two sub-feature rows make divergence visible at a glance: shared chips highlighted, missing chips greyed out, and the feat-J / tok-J similarity scores reported in the header bar (here feat-J = 44% and tok-J = 22%: the pair shares fewer than half of the 13 sub-features and about a fifth of the normalised tokens despite the common canonical skeleton). We use the tool throughout the paper as the qualitative counterpart to the feature_-compare.py pipeline of Section B.2: where the pipeline reports aggregate distances, the explorer makes the per-engine code visible so a reviewer can audit which sub-features differ between any two variants and how the divergence manifests in source. This is also the primary reason we report sub-feature divergence rather than pure “convergence”: the paper’s algorithmic-similarity findings come from the pipeline’s distance numbers, but the qualitative read of those numbers in the explorer makes clear that variants share a common high-level spec while diverging substantially in sub-feature selection and language-specific form. 56 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

> Fig. 6  Chess Engine Feature Explorer,  specification view : 28 engine variants arrayed around the canonical CPW pseudocode skeleton (centre). The visualisation makes the size of the variant space immediately legible: any two cards can be selected for side-by-side comparison (Figure 7). The bottom strip shows three concrete variants ( chess-rust-codex  in Rust,  chess-ruby-codex  in Ruby,  chess-apl-codex54  in APL) selected for the side-by-side view, with feat-J / tok-J / LOC summaries in each card. Live at  https://blog.mathieuacher.com/agentic-chessengine-metaanalysis/reports/features/ quiescence_art_advanced.html .

Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 57 

Fig. 7 Chess Engine Feature Explorer, compare view : a Java vs. Rust pair ( chess-java-cc 

vs. chess-rust-codex ) on quiescence search. Sub-feature tags at the top of each panel mark which of the 13 algorithmic sub-features fired in that engine (highlighted = present, dim = absent). The source code is rendered below. The header bar reports feat-J/tok-J similarity (here 44%/22%: fewer than half the sub-features and about a fifth of the normalised tokens are shared) and the sub-feature counts (8/13 vs. 5/13). The left-hand engine list lets the reviewer pick any two variants from the 28 engine cards. Sorting by sub-feature count, language, or average feat-J similarity is supported. 

B.6 SE-activity per-engine intensity matrix 

Table 9 reports the per-engine SE-activity profile cited from Section 8.1: each cell is the Likert level on the share of the session’s steps tagged with each of 10 capabilities (absent −, light •,moderate •• , heavy • • • ). Rows are grouped by language category and sorted by summed intensity within each category. The dagger † marks engines whose main session transcripts were compacted before capture (lower bound, see Section B.9). The double-dagger ‡ marks the special-role underconverged case ( chess-mojo , Section C) shown for transparency and excluded from main-corpus comparators. 

B.7 Per-engine trajectory case studies 

The four representative engines whose feature-introduction trajectories are summarised in Section 5.1.1, namely Ruby (mainstream general-purpose, Claude Code ), COBOL (legacy), LaTeX (Codex, chess-latex-codex-replication ), and Brainfuck (esoteric), show qualitatively different patterns. Step counts here follow the feature-trajectory extraction behind Figure 2, which pools sessions slightly differently from the SE-activity matrix of Table 9: 

Ruby (plan → dump → refine). Of 32 distinct features detected across 16 steps, 23 appear in a single step: the “implement the plan” burst early in the session, touching all of the rules and protocol layer, two board representations, the entire search core, six search extensions, material +PST evaluation, and time management. Only nine features arrive later. The cadence is a three-stage arc: plan (step 1) → dump-the-engine (step 3, the burst that writes most of the codebase) → refine (two short rounds of search-extension + evaluation additions driven by “improve the Elo” prompts). 58 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 9 SE-activity intensity profile per engine, grouped by the RQ1 language taxonomy. Each cell is the Likert level on the share of the session’s steps tagged with that capability: −

absent, • light (1 event or ≤5%), •• moderate (5–20%), • • • heavy ( >20%). Steps = total trajectory steps, computed over the full recoverable record, a different accounting from the prompt counts of Table 1 (see Section 3.4). #Caps = number of capabilities exercised at any level. Int. = summed Likert (0–30). Horizontal rules separate language categories, and rows within each category are sorted by intensity descending. Column abbreviations: Design (design & spec), Impl (implementation: writing or editing source files), Test (testing: perft, UCI smoke, test harness), Debug (debugging), Build (build & tooling), VCS (version control), Bench (benchmarking: strength measurement), Read (code comprehension), Perf (performance engineering), Docs (documentation). A dagger ( †) marks engines whose main session transcripts were compacted by Claude Code before capture: the row reflects only the surviving subagent sidecars, which is a strict lower bound on the session’s actual SE activity (Section B.9). A double-dagger ( ‡) marks the special-role underconverged case ( chess-mojo , Section C). Its row is shown for transparency and excluded from main-corpus row-wise comparisons.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

> Engine Lang. Design Impl Test Debug Build VCS Bench Read Perf Docs Steps #Caps Int.
> chess-mojo ‡Mojo • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • −−6824
> chess-rust-cc-redo Rust •• • • • • • • •• • • • •• • • • • • •• •• 49 10 24
> chess-rust-codex Rust • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • −−3824
> chess-purec-codex C• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • • • •−4923
> cplusplus-chess C++ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • •• −•• 16 923
> chess-java Java •• • • • • • • • • ••• • • • • • −−7818
> chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex Rust (port) −•• • • •• • • • • • • • • • • • •−5818
> chess-ruby-cc Ruby •• • • • • • • • • •• −• • • • • • −−10 718
> chess-ruby-codex Ruby • • • • • • • • • −−• • • • • • •−−7616
> chess-py Python • • • • • • • • • •−−• • • •−−10 614
> chess-rust-cc †Rust −•−• • • • • • −•• • • • • • −8614
> chess-cplusplus-claude †C++ −•−• • • •−•• • • −−18 59
> chess-java-cc Java • • • •−•−−−• • • −−648
> chess-purec †C−••••−−• • • −−557
> chess-py-cc †Python −−−−•−••−−133
> chess-apl-codex54 APL • • • • • • • • • • • • •• •• • • • • • • • • • −34 925
> chess-newlang-codex DSL • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • • • • • • • •−21 924
> chess-why3 Why3 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • −−9824
> chess-icon-codex Icon • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • • • • • • −−6822
> lean-chess Lean • • • • • • •• • • • • • • •• • • • •• •−21 922
> chess-Rocq Rocq •• −−• • • −• • • −• • • −−11 411
> chess-why3-cc †Why3 −−−• • • −−−• • • −−626
> chess-latex-codex-replication LaTeX • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • • • • • • •−15 923
> chess-css-codex CSS • • • • • • •• •• −• • • •• • • • −−17 718
> chess-css-codex-guided CSS • • • • • • • • • •−•−• • • −−9614
> latex-chess-engine LaTeX −−•• •• −•• •• • • • •• −37 613
> chess-css-cc †CSS −−−• • • −••• • • −−53 48
> chess-sql †SQL −−••−−••−−344
> chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex COBOL (port) • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • −• • • 28 927
> COBOL-chess COBOL • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • • • • • • • −34 926
> chess-cobol-cc COBOL −• • • • • • • • • ••• • • • • • • • • •• 23 922
> chess-assembly-codex Asm • • • • • • •• • • • • • •• • • • • • • −−12 821
> chess-brainfuck Brainfuck • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• •• 38 10 28
> chess-brainfuck-cc Brainfuck •••• • • ••• •• • • ••• 192 10 16

COBOL (gradual accretion across debug loops). 24 features across 37 steps with 331 Write/Edit events. The features are spread across the session rather than dumped in one burst. The long stretches between feature additions are heavy on edits rather than writes: the agent iterates on an existing file to fix a perft mismatch or a gauntlet regression. This is the 

oracle-debug shape: fewer bursts, more revisions per feature, and a strength curve that zigzags as regressions get caught and rolled back. 

LaTeX (thin but coherent). The heredoc-aware trace recovers 6 of 38 features from the surviving authoring events (37 file writes across 15 steps). This undercounts the actual engine capability, since the expl3 macro logic is dense enough that several pattern heuristics fail to match, but the trace surfaces FEN, castling, en passant, promotion, perft, and material evaluation all in a compact early cluster, with no search-extension features at all. LaTeX’s macro-expansion model caps the engine at a depth that does not require aspiration windows or null-move pruning to reach. 

Brainfuck (long flat region, late burst). 20 features across 198 steps and 87 authoring events. The cumulative-feature curve is flat for the first 150-ish steps and then jumps from 

∼7 to 18 features near session end. The long flat region is the code-generation loop: the agent writes Python that emits Brainfuck, and most of that Python is scaffolding that does not yet introduce new chess features. The shape illustrates that in a language too constrained for direct authorship, feature introduction is not where the agent’s effort goes. Most of the effort is in making an existing feature work. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 59 

B.8 Qualitative supervision protocol 

A practical threat to any study of “what the agent built” is that a capable model can satisfy the user’s literal request while side-stepping its spirit (the chess-css-codex case is canonical here, see Section 6.3). We therefore document an explicit qualitative supervision protocol applied across the corpus. (1) Read the engine-core diff on at least one checkpoint per session (target 

src/ , lib/ , or the language equivalent). (2) Grep for chess-library imports inside engine-core files (e.g. import chess in a non-Python engine, use shakmaty in Rust). (3) Verify the oracle is independent: the evaluation harness may legitimately use python-chess for PGN parsing or UCI bridging, but the engine under evaluation must not. (4) Redirect when evasion is detected (in chess-css-codex the redirect produced a second, compliant engine under strict-css/ ,kept in-tree for transparency). The novelty audit in Section 5.2 operationalises the grep step. 

B.9 Subagent-only floor counts for archived-transcript engines 

The seven n/a † rows of Table 1 are engines whose main-session JSONLs were com-pacted by Claude Code before our pipeline captured them. The subagent sidecars in 

~/.claude/projects/ . . . /subagents/ that still survived at our 2026-04-20 capture yielded the partial floor counts in Table 10. (Those sidecars have since been removed by client-side retention along with the rest of the Claude Code corpus transcripts, see Data and code availability. The floor counts below persist only in the committed replication snapshot.) The numbers are floors : the true main-loop counts are at least this much, and the partial main-session JSONL we found for chess-rust-cc is included here (which is why its floor is the largest of the seven). The seven floors sum to a minimum of 2,105 user messages and $125 of Anthropic list-price token spend across these engines: they were not built “for free”. We retain 

n/a in Table 1 rather than substituting these floors because mixing measurements with floors in one column would mislead. 

Table 10 Per-engine subagent-only floor counts. Sub jsonl = number of distinct subagent transcripts. User = user-role messages within them. Asst = assistant-role messages. In/Out kTok = input (incl. cache-read and cache-creation) and output tokens. USD = Anthropic list-price floor estimate ($3 / Mtok input, $15 / Mtok output, $0.30 / Mtok cache-read, $3.75 / Mtok cache-creation, no account discounts).                                                      

> Engine Sub jsonl User Asst In kTok Out kTok USD floor
> chess-rust-cc 1+2 645 1,028 95,248 1,466 $65.43
> test-superset (ChessCSS) 52 930 1,267 44,150 286 $42.90
> chess-cplusplus-claude 18 190 251 7,409 2$7.70
> chess-purec 5148 204 7,827 1$4.95
> chess-why3-cc 6127 146 3,401 2$2.73
> chess-sql 347 70 1,614 0$0.92
> chess-py-cc 118 20 304 0$0.27
> Total floor 2,105 2,986 159,953 1,757 $124.90

C Special-role experiments: protocol details 

The bottom block of Table 1 (Section 4) lists the five engines that follow protocols different enough from “design a chess engine in L from scratch” to be kept separate from the main-corpus aggregates. Each is referenced inline from the relevant RQ. This appendix collects the protocol-difference details in one place for completeness. 60 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Java →language ports. chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex and chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex 

are Codex sessions where the user asks the agent to translate the existing chess-java-cc 

engine into another target language, preserving module structure and observable behaviour. The research question behind these experiments is “can a chess engine that is good in language A be as good in language B?” , a question about portability of a specific engine design, not about what the agent would author from scratch. We therefore exclude them from the main-corpus tables (they would bias the Rust and COBOL cells of Table 6). On the external ruler the Rust port lands at 1922 Elo (anchor) and the Java →COBOL port at 1404 Elo (refinement, the panel never resolved it). That is a ∼520 Elo cross-PL gap from the same source code, the ablation discussed in Section 7. 

DSL design (engine-dsl). chess-newlang-codex (“GAMBIT”) is a Codex session where the user asks the agent to design a new chess-engine DSL and its end-to-end C ++ 17 transpiler (parser, runtime backend, bitboards, FEN parsing, UCI loop, negamax + αβ , TT, perft runner). The agent’s role spans language designer plus compiler writer plus engine writer , which is not comparable to either a C ++ engine or a from-scratch engine in some target language. 

Agent-heavy co-design (engine-codesign). test-superset (“ChessCSS” Acher and Claude Code (2026)) is a chess engine where as much logic as possible is expressed in pure CSS: move generation, legality filtering, check detection, and move scoring are all CSS rules using :has() ,CSS if() , and a z-index-argmax + elementFromPoint trick to pick the best move in O(1) . The final engine contains ≈55k CSS rules ( ≈17 MB) and only ≈340 lines of JavaScript (14 functions, all for I/O / game-loop control that CSS cannot structurally express). Git history is the authoring record: 31 commits over 5 days (2026-02-27 to 2026-03-03), documenting a progressive JavaScript →CSS migration. The repository’s README explicitly flags its methodological status: “I really had to drive the agent with technical expertise (chess and programming), to be proactive, and even to encourage the agents to not giving up with CSS” . That protocol is materially different from the minimal-instruction default the rest of the corpus follows. We discuss the case as the positive counterexample to the chess-css-codex evasion (Section 6.3). 

Underconverged case: chess-mojo . chess-mojo is the corpus’s clearest example of a session that did not converge to a competitive engine. The agent assembled a Mojo UCI scaffold, wrote a milestone roadmap, and produced a working perft-checked move generator and a shallow search. The engine plateaued at roughly 900 Elo against calibrated Stockfish and did not recover under the user’s budget. We include it in Table 1 for transparency, label it 

underconverged , and exclude it from every main-corpus aggregate (Elo distribution, cost analysis, SE-activity matrix, oracle-first first-call statistics). The engine plays legal chess and satisfies the “working engine” criterion, but it sits well below every main-corpus engine in playing strength. It serves as the weakest point of the corpus, not as a data point in any cross-engine median. 

Phase-mix evidence that the protocols differ. The cross-project trajectory analysis of Section 8.2 confirms these protocols are empirically distinct from the main-corpus default. The two ports sit at 60–71% other (translation and module-mapping work) with only 18–20% feature 

and emit no recoverable Elo-claim curve. The DSL experiment has the highest feature fraction in this group (38%), consistent with the agent designing two artefacts at once. chess-mojo has a single Elo claim and no evolution curve. Pooling these four engines with the main corpus would distort the task-class medians and the oracle-cadence statistics used in RQ5 .

D Deep-dive: chess-rust-cc-redo , a second try at Rust 

The Rust cell of the main corpus originally held two engines: chess-rust-codex (Codex, scratch-built but using the chess crate for board-state types) and chess-rust-cc (Claude Code, scratch-built with archived transcripts). The crate dependency in the first Rust row was an evasion of the “implement it yourself” spirit of the experiment: the agent delegated board representation, move generation, and legal-move checking to a third-party library and authored only search and evaluation. We therefore re-ran Rust from a blank slate, under the explicit Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 61 constraint no chess crate , as chess-rust-cc-redo . This engine is a scratch-built Rust UCI engine with bitboards, PEXT/PDEP move generation, iterative deepening, PVS, a two-tier transposition table, null-move pruning, LMR/LMP, futility/reverse-futility pruning, singular extensions, ProbCut, SEE pruning, and 35 perft tests. The session ran across four Claude Code conversations, 55 user prompts, $63.94 of list-price spend, over roughly 70 wallclock hours (Table 1, Table 6). The authoring log is intact (no compaction), the code is reproducible, and the engine converges to a measurable strength. Three observations from the session stand out, each qualitatively different from the quan-titative patterns the rest of the paper reports. We record them here because they sharpen Sections 7 to 8 and hint at a dimension of the benchmark the main tables do not expose. 

Observation 1: high effort, and a self-estimate that under-counted the payoff. The session’s stated goal was Elo 2000 against a calibrated Stockfish . After four rounds of improvement, the agent’s own 1,200-game gauntlet put it at approximately 1853 Elo ( ±24.7), recorded as ∼1879 Elo in the final commit and used as the Self value of Table 6, short of that goal. Yet on the external ruler the engine actually lands at 1989 ± 105 Elo (Table 6), top-three in the corpus and a Pattern B case where the agent under -reported its own strength. Rust is a mainstream general-purpose language with no obvious execution-model handicap for a chess engine. The feature set implemented (Table 3) is essentially the full search-extension catalogue, richer than most mainstream engines in the corpus. And the agent had a single-concentrated-goal, multi-session budget. By the agent’s own in-loop signal the Elo 2000 target stayed out of reach, and, tellingly, the agent could not tell it had essentially arrived. This nuances the “Rust tops the corpus” reading of Table 6: the scratch-built Rust engines do top the table (chess-rust-cc-redo at 1989 Elo, second only to the Java engine), but reaching that band took neither quickly nor cheaply, and a session’s own gauntlet can under-count progress just as easily as the more common Pattern A over-count. 

Observation 2: benchmarking misallocation, and the user had to intervene. The engine was calibrated against four Stockfish skill levels: L5 ( ≈1650 Elo), L8 ( ≈1900 Elo), L10 (≈2000 Elo), and L13 ( ≈2400 Elo), at 300 games each, 1,200 games total. Read against the final 1853 Elo estimate, the L5 and L13 matches carried almost no calibration information: the engine scored 80% against L5 (it wins almost everything) and 7.5% against L13 (it loses almost everything). Only the L8 match (45%) and L10 match (19%) sit in the calibration sweet spot where score differences are informative about Elo. Half the 600 games spent on L5 and L13 were largely wasted, and, more tellingly, it was clear to the user before the gauntlet finished that L13 was too strong and L5 too weak for this engine’s band. The agent did not adjust the gauntlet composition on its own. The user had to be proactive and stop the mis-calibrated matches. This is a session-level pattern the cost table (Table 1) and the SE-activity matrix (Table 9) cannot surface: evaluation time can be mis-allocated in a way the agent does not detect , even when the tooling to do better (shrinking the opponent ladder after a few games at extremes) is within the agent’s capability. 

Observation 3: chess domain knowledge surfaced at the wrong level of abstraction. 

Partway through the session the agent diagnosed recurring weaknesses in the engine’s opening play by replaying the gauntlet games, identifying specific anti-patterns (piece placement errors in the Sicilian, weak response to 1. d4 setups), and proposing an opening book as the fix. That the agent reaches for game-level analysis, rather than code-level debugging alone, is itself noteworthy: the coding agent is drawing on chess-domain knowledge that goes beyond programming. It read its own pgn output and evaluated move sequences the way a human chess student would. But the fix it proposed (“precompute an opening book”) was, from a chess expert’s point of view, a short-term workaround rather than a remedy. The engine’s opening losses were symptoms of a deeper evaluation or search issue (giving a piece away for nothing in a quasi-tactical position) that an opening book would only paper over. The chess-expert reading is that the opening book masks the bug in positions the book covers and leaves it intact everywhere else. This sharpens two points. First, the benchmark has a domain-knowledge surface area: agents that understand chess better can debug their own play in ways that domain-agnostic agents cannot, and this affects measured strength. Second, domain-knowledge usage is not uniformly helpful: surface-level pattern recognition (“my openings lose”) can drive fixes that do not address the underlying engineering problem (“my evaluation of quiet-tactical positions is off”), and the agent does not always distinguish the two. 62 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Why this deep dive is here and not elsewhere in the paper. Observations 1–2 are observational data points that weaken a naive reading of Table 6 (“Rust sits at the top, done”) and add a caveat to Table 1 about how the cost is spent. Observation 3 is a qualitative signal from a single session that we do not have the sample size to make into a population claim. We record it here as a pointer for future work on domain-knowledge-aware coding benchmarks, and as a caveat that chess, for all its oracle richness, tests programming plus chess , not programming in isolation. 

E External Elo assessment: methodology, round-robin cross-check, and tables 

This appendix documents the unified re-evaluation harness behind the External Elo Assessment 

column of Table 6 (Section 7). The headline number is a Bradley-Terry MLE that pools the anchor gauntlet with a corpus-wide round-robin. We report the round-robin separately here as an internal-consistency cross-check (Section E.4). It is intended to be sufficient for an independent group to reproduce both the anchor gauntlet and the round-robin on a different machine. 

E.1 Why a re-evaluation was needed 

Each agent’s in-tree gauntlet used a different combination of opponent set, time control, hash size, opening book, and game count. Table 6 pools those numbers, but they are not directly comparable: the same engine plays ∼300 Elo stronger at TC =200 ms movetime against 

Stockfish UCI_Elo =2400 than at TC =120s +1s/move against Stockfish Skill Level = 10 .We therefore designed a uniform harness around three principles: externally-rated reference engines (not labels), enough games for the standard error to fall below ∼200 Elo, and a single time control across the whole corpus. 

E.2 Reference engines and Phase A calibration 

Five references, fixed across the corpus: 

– Rustic Alpha 3.0.4 : published CCRL 40/4 rating 1820 Elo. Distributed as an immutable Docker image with the binary pinned at SHA. 

– Asymptote 0.7 : published CCRL 40/4 rating 2150 Elo. Same Docker pinning. 

– Stockfish 18 Skill Level = 5, 10, 15 , three rungs. Their CCRL-equivalent Elo was 

not taken from the Stockfish label but calibrated empirically against Rustic and Asymptote on the host hardware (Apple M-series laptop, Docker on macOS): Skill 5 ≈ 1658 Elo ±126 Elo, Skill 10 ≈ 2004 Elo ±112 Elo, Skill 15 ≈ 2325 Elo ±124 Elo. 

These numbers are hardware-dependent (a faster machine raises the effective Elo of a fixed Skill setting) and would need to be re-derived on a different host. Calibration cost: ≈1 hour wall, 200 SPRT-capped games. We deliberately do not use Stockfish ’s UCI_LimitStrength=true mode. Phase 2 of our calibration showed its ladder is compressed: the gap between UCI_Elo =2400 and UCI_Elo =2600 

is ≈100 Elo of effective playing strength, not the labelled 200 Elo. The gap between UCI_-Elo =1800 and UCI_Elo =2200 is ≈300 Elo, not 400 Elo. Compression is most severe above 2000 Elo, which is exactly where many agents’ self-evals concentrated. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 63 

E.3 Phase B match settings 

– TC: 120s +1s/move (slow enough that pruning quality and eval richness dominate, fast enough that 30 games per pair fit in ≈30 minutes wall). 

– Concurrency: 2, with –cpus=2 –memory=1g per Docker engine, so two pair-of-engine sub-tournaments run in parallel at most. 

– SPRT cap: elo0 =-50 , elo1 =+50 , alpha =beta =0.05 , max 30 games per pair. SPRT termi-nates early when one hypothesis is statistically decided. 

– Openings: 256-position EPD book reused across Phase A and Phase B, with positions selected at random per game. 

– Resign: agreed score 900 Elo for 5 plies. Adjudicated draw: 6 plies of ≤10 Elo score after move 40. 

– Per-anchor estimate: ∆ = −400 log 10 (1 /s − 1) with s ∈ (0 , 1) the engine’s match score, and 

SE = 400 ln 10 ·√N ·s(1 −s) .

– Per-engine estimate: inverse-variance combination of measurable per-anchor estimates. Saturated pairs ( s = 0 or s = 1 ) contribute one-sided bounds only and are flagged in the per-engine card. 

– “Bounded” status (used in Figure 5): every per-anchor pair was saturated. The engine’s true Elo lies below the lowest unsaturated upper bound. We stamp at 1276 Elo or 1438 Elo depending on which anchor’s bound was tightest. Bounded engines have no measurable signal in Phase B alone. 

E.4 Round-robin cross-check: design 

The round-robin is the internal-consistency cross-check summarised in Section 7: it scores each engine against the rest of the corpus only, independent of any external reference, and feeds the unified Bradley-Terry fit. Settings shared with Phase B (TC, concurrency, opening book, draw/resign rules) are identical so the two bodies of games are on the same scale. Round-robin-specific choices: 

– Two games per unordered pair (one game each colour, same opening). Total: (n

> 2

) · 2 games, 

n = 23 in the first pass and n = 26 once the port/DSL pass completes. 

– No SPRT cap on the round-robin pairs: every pair plays exactly two games, regardless of who is ahead. The Bradley-Terry MLE pools across pairs to recover global Elo. 

– Bradley-Terry fit: Newton-Raphson with damping factor 0.3, 400 iterations (well past convergence on this graph density). Anchored to chess-rust-cc-redo ’s anchor-based Elo of 1989 Elo after every iteration. 

– Prior: a half virtual-draw vs every opponent (PRIOR_GAMES = 0.5) keeps the MLE finite for engines with 100% or 0% scores against any subset of opponents. 

E.5 Reproduction recipe 

1. cd eval2; ./runners/run_phaseA_sf_calibration.sh : recalibrates Stockfish Skill Level effective Elo on the target hardware. Required only if the target hardware is not Apple M-series ( ∼1 hour). 2. ./runners/run_anchor_gauntlet.sh : runs the full Phase B against all engines in the manifest. ∼10 hours wall on a 2-CPU concurrency budget. 3. ./runners/score_anchor.sh : aggregates PGNs into per-engine cards in results/anchor/ .4. ./runners/run_round_robin.sh : the round-robin pass, ∼25 hours wall for n = 23 and ∼35 hours for n = 26 . Resumable: re-running skips already-completed pairs. 5. python3 lib/score_rr.py : Bradley-Terry MLE + Pearson/Spearman vs Phase B. 6. python3 scripts/plot_rr_vs_phaseb.py : regenerates Figure 5. 64 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

E.6 Unified Bradley-Terry MLE: pooling Phase B and round-robin 

The Phase B inverse-variance combine and the round-robin BT MLE (Section E.4) are two views of the same underlying corpus of TC =120s +1s games. We pool every game played between every pair of engines (anchor or corpus) into a single Bradley-Terry log-likelihood and maximise it by Newton-Raphson, with six anchor nodes held fixed at their known Elo: Rustic (1820 Elo), Asymptote (2150 Elo), and Stockfish Skill 0/5/10/15 at the Phase A calibration values (900 Elo/1658 Elo/2004 Elo/2325 Elo). The pooled likelihood treats a 0/9 saturation against Rustic as a genuine one-sided constraint (“this engine is at most ∼1438 Elo”) and propagates it via shared opponents to every other estimate. The IV-combine alone discards saturated pairs and so loses that signal. Per-engine 95% confidence intervals are estimated by a paired-game bootstrap ( n= 200 resamples, refit each replicate). The pooled corpus is 3,256 games across 531 unique pairs, which includes a 36-pair targeted-skill anchor pass (one or two new SF 

Skill Level matches per engine, picked so the engine’s expected score against the chosen Skill rung is in the 30–70% information-rich region). The pass adds 720 anchor-information-rich games and collapses one previously-pathological estimate ( sf_skill11 at 5952 Elo from a single saturated opponent in the original fit, now 2262 ± 189 Elo with eight new corpus edges). 

Headline corpus-wide ranking after the pooled fit. The top tier is unchanged from Section 7: chess-java-cc (2094 ± 56 Elo), chess-rust-cc-redo (1990 ± 57 Elo), 

chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex (1989 ± 54 Elo), chess-rust-cc (1825 ± 58 Elo), 

chess-purec-retry (1798 ± 82 Elo), and chess-ruby-cc (1753 ± 55 Elo). The mid-band engines whose Phase B and RR estimates disagreed most now have a single number with a tight CI: chess-newlang-codex 1622 ± 68 Elo, chess-Rocq 1315 ± 83 Elo, chess-icon-codex 

1168 ± 88 Elo. The full table is generated by eval2/lib/score_combined_bt.py (run-time ≈8 s) and saved to eval2/results/combined_bt_summary.md . Two no-win engines (chess-latex-codex-replication , latex-chess-engine ) drift to extreme negative estimates (−3235 , −3480 ) because the BT likelihood has no lower bound. A virtual random-mover anchor would constrain them, but we did not add one. 

E.7 Per-engine round-robin Elo: full table 

The round-robin column “Anchor Elo ∆” is the round-robin estimate minus the anchor-based Elo. Engines whose anchor-based Elo is a saturation floor ( Phase B (floor) ) have their ∆

marked with ‘*’: the anchor number is not a measurement in those rows. The table is sorted by round-robin Elo descending. 

E.8 Limitations of this re-evaluation 

– Hardware fingerprint. The Stockfish Skill Level Elo numbers are calibrated on this specific machine. Transferring to a different host requires re-running Phase A. 

– TC choice. TC =120s +1s is a single point in the blitz-to-tournament continuum. Some engines may rank-shift between TC classes (e.g., a deep-search engine that loses on time at blitz but wins at slow TC). Those shifts are not measured here. The correct framing is: “Elo at TC =120s +1s on this hardware”, not “Elo on the abstract CCRL scale”. 

– Round-robin sample size. Two games per pair gives a standard error of ≈200 Elo per pair. Bradley-Terry pools across pairs and pulls per-engine SE down to ≈50 Elo for engines with full coverage, but per-pair direction may be misleading for any single comparison. 

– Coverage holes. Three engines are excluded from the round-robin ( chess-css-cc ,

chess-css-codex , chess-css-codex-guided : no working binary) and four are ex-cluded for time-control mismatch ( chess-brainfuck , chess-brainfuck-cc , chess-sql ,

latex-chess-engine : >30s per move at TC =120s +1s). A separate slow-engine round-robin at TC =600s +5s would close this gap. We did not run it. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 65 

Table 11 Per-engine Elo on the unified TC =120s +1s harness, three rulers side by side: Phase B (anchor-only inverse-variance combine, Section 7, where ≤X marks engines saturated against every Phase B anchor and bounded above by the lowest unsaturated upper bound), BT MLE 

(unified Bradley-Terry MLE pooling Phase B, round-robin, and targeted-skill anchor games, 3,256 games / 531 pairs, Section E.6), and RR (round-robin Bradley-Terry fit anchored to 

chess-rust-cc-redo at 1989 Elo, Section E.4). ∆ is the round-robin minus the BT estimate. ‘NB’ = no lower bound: chess-latex-codex-replication and latex-chess-engine lost every game in the round-robin and the BT likelihood drifts to extreme negatives without a random-mover anchor (cf. Section E.6). † partial round-robin coverage: chess-brainfuck , chess-sql ,and latex-chess-engine played only the slow-engine sub-pass (5 opponents at TC =120s +1s) because they exceed the per-move budget vs the main field. Their RR Elo is on the same scale but rests on fewer pairs. Rows sorted by BT Elo descending. # Engine Phase B BT MLE RR ∆ Opps W-D-L 1 chess-java-cc 2096 Elo ± 132 2094 Elo ± 56 2045 Elo −49 25 48-1-1 2 chess-rust-cc-redo 1989 Elo ± 105 1990 Elo ± 57 1989 Elo −1 25 46-0-4 3 chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex 1922 Elo ± 106 1989 Elo ± 54 2033 Elo +44 25 47-2-1 4 chess-rust-cc 1841 Elo ± 99 1825 Elo ± 58 1889 Elo +64 25 40-1-9 5 chess-ruby-cc ≤1349 Elo 1753 Elo ± 55 1827 Elo +74 25 34-5-11 6 chess-rust-codex 1723 Elo ± 103 1707 Elo ± 63 1812 Elo +105 25 28-15-7 7 chess-cplusplus-claude 1680 Elo ± 103 1682 Elo ± 58 1827 Elo +145 25 35-3-12 8 cplusplus-chess 1709 Elo ± 111 1627 Elo ± 69 1703 Elo +76 25 27-1-22 9 chess-newlang-codex — 1622 Elo ± 68 1696 Elo +74 25 24-5-20 10 chess-py ≤1349 Elo 1616 Elo ± 55 1784 Elo +168 25 26-15-9 11 chess-why3-cc 1618 Elo ± 163 1567 Elo ± 56 1730 Elo +163 25 23-12-14 12 chess-py-cc ≤1349 Elo 1499 Elo ± 55 1729 Elo +230 25 27-5-18 13 chess-java 1509 Elo ± 131 1483 Elo ± 72 1684 Elo +201 25 19-14-17 14 chess-assembly-codex 1403 Elo ± 196 1468 Elo ± 72 1651 Elo +183 25 18-11-21 15 chess-purec 1440 Elo ± 193 1415 Elo ± 65 1664 Elo +249 25 21-7-22 16 chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex — 1404 Elo ± 69 1612 Elo +208 25 16-9-25 17 chess-purec-codex ≤1438 Elo 1402 Elo ± 73 1579 Elo +177 25 12-12-26 18 COBOL-chess ≤1276 Elo 1365 Elo ± 80 1544 Elo +179 25 13-5-32 19 chess-ruby-codex ≤1438 Elo 1346 Elo ± 72 1537 Elo +191 25 10-10-30 20 chess-Rocq 1499 Elo ± 171 1315 Elo ± 83 1562 Elo +247 28 23-10-33 21 chess-brainfuck — 1299 Elo ± 94 1639 Elo † +340 5 21-1-6 22 chess-cobol-cc ≤1276 Elo 1274 Elo ± 85 1537 Elo +263 25 10-10-30 23 lean-chess ≤1276 Elo 1271 Elo ± 75 1537 Elo +266 25 12-6-32 24 chess-why3 ≤1276 Elo 1210 Elo ± 74 1502 Elo +292 25 7-11-32 25 chess-icon-codex ≤1276 Elo 1168 Elo ± 88 1526 Elo +358 28 23-5-40 26 chess-apl-codex54 ≤1276 Elo 686 Elo ± 205 1373 Elo +687 28 12-2-54 27 chess-sql — 523 Elo ± 297 1384 Elo † +861 5 7-2-21 28 chess-latex-codex-replication ≤1276 Elo -3235 Elo (NB) 1264 Elo — 25 0-0-50 29 latex-chess-engine — -3480 Elo (NB) 1220 Elo † — 5 0-0-30 

E.9 Q2 self-reproduction sweep: methodology and per-engine results 

The reward-signal claims in Section 6.2 and Section 8.2 rest on three sub-claims: that each engine’s self-reported Elo is reproducible from its own eval methodology, that the magnitude of the reproduction is systematically higher than the anchor-based Elo, and that the Stockfish 

UCI_LimitStrength ladder is non-monotonic at the rungs the agents chose. We tested all three by re-running each engine’s original eval setup (same TC, same Hash, same opponent grid, same games-per-rung scaled down for time budget) on host hardware against host Stockfish 

18, with no Docker, no anchors, no eval2 re-tuning: a third party with the same machine could reproduce the same numbers from the engines’ own scripts. 

Configuration. The 11 engines covered are those for which the original eval script is parametric (TC + Hash + opponent grid we could extract) and the binary is host-runnable. For each engine, the opponent grid is the engine’s own ( UCI_Elo rungs for ten engines, SF Skill Level 66 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel for chess-cplusplus-claude ), TC and Hash match the original script (mostly TC=10s+0.1s, hash sizes ranging from 16 MB to 128 MB), 20 games per rung (30 for chess-newlang-codex ). Total: 46 matches / 953 games. Concurrency = 2 with caffeinate to prevent system sleep. The full per-engine configuration is in eval2/runners/self_reproduction.yaml . The runner is 

eval2/runners/run_self_repro_host.sh and the scorer is eval2/lib/score_self_repro.py .

Per-engine results. Table 12 reports, per engine, the original self-claim (point value or band), the reproduction Elo we measure under the same methodology on host hardware, the anchor-based Elo from Phase B, and the round-robin Elo. The two ∆ columns quantify the deviations: claim-vs-repro and repro-vs-anchor. 

Table 12 Q2 self-reproduction: per-engine Elo under each engine’s original methodology (host-native, 953 games total). Repro is inverse-variance-weighted across the engine’s own SF UCI_Elo 

rungs (or SF Skill Level for chess-cplusplus-claude ). Anchor and RR are from Section 7 and Section E.4 (Phase B values shared with Table 11, and “ ≤ X” = saturated against every Phase B anchor). ∆(repro–claim) measures whether the methodology is reproducible , where small |∆| means it is. ∆(repro–anchor) measures the methodology bias relative to anchor-based Elo, and “ ≥” denotes a lower bound when Anchor is saturated. Mean of |∆repro–claim | across the 9 non-Skill engines with a point claim: 129 Elo (9 of 11 engines overall within ±150 Elo). Mean of ∆repro–anchor : +348 Elo over the 7 non-Skill engines with point Anchor (range +141 

to +681 ). Two further saturated engines have ∆ lower-bounded at +451 Elo and +568 Elo .                                                                                                                

> Engine Self-claim Repro Anchor RR ∆rep-claim ∆rep-anc
> chess-purec 1997 2121 ±78 1440 ±193 1664 +124 +681
> chess-purec-codex 1670–1972 1889 ±78 ≤1438 1579 in band ≥+451
> chess-rust-cc 2110 2208 ±88 1841 ±99 1889 +98 +367
> chess-rust-cc-redo 1879 2355 ±88 1989 ±105 1989 +476 +366
> chess-rust-codex 2043 1987 ±88 1723 ±103 1812 −56 +264
> chess-cplusplus-claude 1897 1485 ±124 1680 ±103 1827 −412 −195
> cplusplus-chess 2087 1984 ±101 1709 ±111 1703 −103 +275
> chess-ruby-cc 1840 1917 ±124 ≤1349 1827 +77 ≥+568
> chess-why3-cc 1882 1959 ±95 1618 ±163 1730 +77 +341
> chess-Rocq 1500 1640 ±101 1499 ±171 1562 +140 +141
> chess-newlang-codex 2170 2182 ±72 —1696 +12 —

Three findings. 

– Reproducibility. 9 of 11 engines reproduce within ±150 Elo of their original claim (chess-newlang-codex is the cleanest at ∆rep-claim = +12 ). The agents weren’t fabricating numbers: the bias is embedded in the methodology itself. 

– Systematic over-statement. Repro is uniformly higher than anchor across all UCI_-LimitStrength -using engines: mean +348 Elo over the 7 engines with a point Anchor (range +141 Elo to +681 Elo ), and lower-bounded at +451 Elo and +568 Elo for the 2 saturated engines. The one Skill-Level user comes in at −195 Elo . The direction and magnitude depend on which rungs the agent chose: the higher the rungs, the larger the inflation, matching Phase A’s compression measurements. 

– Two diagnostic outliers. chess-rust-cc-redo reproduces +476 Elo above its own claim (the agent under-reported deliberately, and the anchor at 1989 Elo confirms a real 

∼2000 Elo engine). chess-cplusplus-claude is the only engine that used SF Skill Level 

(5,7,10,12,14) instead of UCI_LimitStrength . Once the Skill levels are Phase-A-calibrated on this hardware (Skill 5 = 1658 Elo, Skill 14 = 2245 Elo), the math comes out −412 Elo 

below the original claim. Different SF rating knob, different bias direction. Both fail without the right external anchor. 

Per-rung non-monotonicity. Two engines exhibit per-rung scores that are not monotonically decreasing in the SF UCI_Elo label, on the same machine, against the same opponent build, with the same opening book: Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 67 

– chess-purec : 95% vs SF1500, 80% vs SF1800, 35% vs SF2000 , 70% vs SF2200 , 38% vs SF2400. The same engine plays 350 Elo-Elo differently against two adjacent rungs that are labelled 200 Elo apart. 

– chess-purec-codex : 87.5% vs SF1500, 65% vs SF1700, 75% vs SF1800 , 35% vs SF1900 ,52.5% vs SF2000. Adjacent rungs disagree by 40 percentage points. This is direct evidence that, at this part of the curve, the UCI_Elo labels do not form a calibrated ladder on this hardware. No amount of “more games per rung” fixes a non-monotonic ladder. 

E.10 The chess-purec retry experiment: protocol and full results 

Section 8.2 reports a single controlled retry of the highest-bias engine in the corpus. This section records the protocol and the details omitted from the body. 

Engine selection. chess-purec has the largest repro-vs-anchor gap of the self-reproduction sweep ( +681 Elo , Table 12). The original session self-claimed 1997 Elo, the Phase B anchor assessment is 1440 ± 193 Elo, and the unified Bradley-Terry refinement is 1415 ± 65 Elo. 

Controls. Three variables were controlled. First, source : the retry session restarted from the same final git commit as the original engine, so the starting code is identical. Second, model : the session was pinned to Opus 4.6 , the model that built the original engine, so no model-version improvement can explain a gain. Third, the reward signal , which is the only substantive change: the original session’s UCI_LimitStrength self-gauntlet was replaced by a 14-game match per iteration against two calibrated anchors, Rustic (1820 Elo) and Stockfish Skill 10 (2004 Elo on this hardware), at TC =30s +0.3s. The budget was capped at 30 prompts, about $30 at list price. 

What the agent did. Within the 30-prompt budget the agent committed two changes: a transposition-table flag-correctness fix and a hash-table size increase from 64 to 128 MB. 

Results. Re-evaluated under the same Phase B harness as every other engine, the post-retry binary measures Phase B 1796 ± 98 Elo and unified BT 1798 ± 82 Elo ( chess-purec-retry in the pooled fit of Section E.6). This is a +383 Elo gain over the pre-retry unified BT estimate, with non-overlapping 95% confidence intervals. Phase B and BT agree to within their CIs both pre- and post-retry. 

The agent could not see its own gain. The agent’s in-loop verdict at the end of the retry was that strength was “hovering around baseline”. A 14-game match per anchor is too noisy to resolve a gain of this size in real time, yet the committed changes (the transposition-table fix in particular) transferred to the canonical time control. An anchored but small in-loop signal therefore fixes the direction of the gradient without necessarily giving the agent a readable 

magnitude .

Scope and cost. This is one engine ( n=1). Converting the finding from suggestive to corpus-supported requires repeating the protocol on further high-bias engines, for example 

chess-cplusplus-claude (∆ = −217 claim vs anchor) or chess-rust-codex (∆ = −320 ). The cost ratio of the retry, roughly $0.08 per anchored Elo point gained, is an order of magnitude below typical human chess-engine tuning budgets. 68 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

F Per-engine GitHub repositories 

The 34 chess engines analysed in this paper are released as individual public GitHub repositories under the acherm organisation, following a uniform naming convention 

agentic-chessengine-<lang>[-<agent>][-<variant>] . Each repository carries an MIT 

LICENSE , a per-language .gitignore , and a README.md crediting Mathieu Acher as the human supervisor and naming the primary coding agent (Claude Code or Codex). Suffix conventions are as follows. -cc / -codex disambiguate multi-implementation cells (same language built by both agents). -from-<lang>-codex marks an agent-driven port from another language. -codexfailure flags a session preserved with a documented failure status. For Brainfuck the engine plays but did not meet its pure-language constraint (critical engine logic remained in the Python toolchain, as the repository’s README documents). For Mojo it marks the underconverged session of Section C. -ChessCSS , -TeXCCChess ,and -newlang-codex preserve the engine’s own project identity. Table 13 maps each local working-tree folder used internally during the study to its public repository suffix. The full URL is https://github.com/acherm/agentic-chessengine-<suffix> .

Table 13: The 34 agentic chess-engine repositories on GitHub (acherm or-ganisation). The full URL of each repository is https://github.com/acherm/ agentic-chessengine-<suffix> where Repo suffix is the value shown in the third column. Local folder is the internal working-tree name. cc = Claude Code (Opus 4.6/4.7). cdx = Codex (GPT-5-codex / GPT-5.3-codex, with one APL run also using GPT-5.4). # Local folder Repo suffix ∗ Language Agent 1 chess-apl-codex54 apl-codex APL cdx 

2 chess-assembly-codex assembly-codex x86-64 Asm cdx 

3 chess-brainfuck brainfuck-codexfailure Brainfuck (par-tial failure) 

cdx 

4 chess-brainfuck-cc brainfuck Brainfuck cc 

5 chess-cobol-cc cobol-cc COBOL cc 

6 COBOL-chess cobol-codex COBOL cdx 

7 chess-cplusplus-claude cpp-cc C++ cc 

8 cplusplus-chess cpp-codex C++ cdx 

9 chess-css-codex css-codex CSS/HTML (evasion) 

cdx 

10 chess-css-codex-guided css-codex-guided CSS/HTML (strict) 

cdx 

11 chess-icon-codex icon-codex Icon cdx 

12 chess-java java-codex Java cdx 

13 chess-java-cc java-cc Java cc 

14 chess-latex-codex-replication latex-codex-replication LaTeX (expl3) cdx 

15 latex-chess-engine latex-TeXCCChess TeX cdx 

16 lean-chess lean-codex Lean 4 cdx 

17 chess-mojo mojo-codexfailure Mojo (undercon-verged) 

cdx 

18 chess-newlang-codex dsl-newlang-codex C++ /GAMBIT DSL 

cdx 

19 chess-purec c-cc C cc 

20 chess-purec-codex c-codex C cdx 

21 chess-py python-codex Python cdx 

22 chess-py-cc python-cc Python cc 

23 chess-revisit-java-toRust-codex rust-from-java-codex Rust (port from Java) 

cdx 

24 chess-Rocq rocq-cc Rocq → OCaml cc 

25 chess-ruby-cc ruby-cc Ruby cc 

26 chess-ruby-codex ruby-codex Ruby cdx 

27 chess-rust-cc rust-cc Rust cc 

28 chess-rust-cc-redo rust-cc-redo Rust cc 

29 chess-rust-codex rust-codex Rust cdx 

30 chess-sql sql-cc SQL cc 

31 chess-why3 why3-codex Why3 →

OCaml 

cdx 

32 chess-why3-cc why3-cc Why3 →

OCaml 

cc 

(continued on next page) Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 69             

> Table 13 (continued)
> #Local folder Repo suffix ∗Language Agent 33 test-superset css-ChessCSS CSS + minimal JS
> cc
> 34 chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL-codex †cobol-from-java-codex COBOL (port from Java)
> cdx
> ∗

Full repository URL is https://github.com/acherm/agentic-chessengine-<suffix> . 

> †

Materialised from the sub-folder chess-revisit-java-toCOBOL/ inside the Rust port working tree (#23) into its own SANDBOX directory before release. 

G Use of LLMs in conducting this study 

Following the community guidelines for empirical studies involving LLMs (Baltes et al., 2025), this appendix documents where LLMs were used to conduct and report the study, what they contributed, and how the authors verified each contribution. LLMs appear in three roles. They are the object of study , namely the corpus agents of Section 2.1. They are an analysis instrument , assisting the construction of the measurement code. They are a writing assistant 

for the analysis reports and for the manuscript. The instrument and writing roles were filled mainly by Claude Code sessions run inside the meta-analysis repository between 2026-04 and 2026-06, on Anthropic Opus 4.x -family and Fable 5 models. The guiding principle is code over judgement . Wherever the paper reports a number, that number is computed by a deterministic script over released primary data (transcripts, repositories, game records), and the script is released too. LLM assistance therefore concentrated on producing code and prose that the authors could inspect and verify, not on producing measurements directly. No quantitative result in the paper is an unverified LLM judgement. Table 14 lists each task with its LLM role, the author role, and the artefact a reader can use to check it. 

Agent-drafted prose and its verification. The per-engine reports and the qualitative deep dives are agent-drafted. Each was generated under an evidence-citation discipline that requires every claim to carry a pointer to a repository file, a git commit, a transcript line, a run log, or a computed statistic, and the first author reviewed each report against those pointers. The reports are intermediate analysis notes rather than publication text, and any report claim that reached the paper was re-verified against the underlying primary data. 

Analysis-session transcripts. The analysis sessions are stored client-side by the product under a retention policy, so we treat them as ephemeral. The durable record of the analysis is the repository itself: the git history, the released scripts, the data snapshots, and the reports they generate. 

Resource demands and justification. The corpus consumed about $3,100 in canonical USD across 34 engines, plus roughly two and a half months of intermittent developer effort and the evaluation compute of the canonical harness. We consider the spend justified on four grounds. Whether programming languages still matter to coding agents at system-construction scale is not answered by the existing benchmark literature (Section 10). The question requires frontier agents, because system-scale builds are precisely the regime where lightweight open models have not demonstrated reliable end-to-end capability (Section 9). The corpus yields artefacts of independent interest to the programming-language and chess-programming communities, including first-of-kind engines in several languages and a reusable cross-PL evaluation platform. Finally, inference prices have fallen steadily since data collection, so replications of this protocol should cost less than the original. We did not instrument energy consumption, and token volumes plus canonical USD are the resource proxies we report. 70 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 14 Division of labour between LLMs and authors, per analysis task. Task LLM role Author role and verifiable artefact Corpus creation, 34 engines (Section 3.1) Object of study. The agents plan, code, build, debug, and validate the engines. Capability-level steering only, audited over 374 follow-up prompts (per-prompt audit released with the artefact). Artefacts: engine repositories, 

Codex rollouts. Extraction pipeline (Section 3.2) Drafted the Python code that derives LOC, features, session ledgers, backlogs, and novelty signals. Specified each derivative, reviewed the code, spot-checked outputs against raw transcripts and repositories. Artefacts: 

scripts/ and data/ JSON, re-runnable. Feature catalogue and depth pipeline (Section 3.3) Drafted the extraction and hotspot-comparison code. Curated the 38-feature catalogue from the chess-programming reference, hand-audited every per-variant verdict for the three case-study features. Artefacts: per-feature JSON, feature explorer. SE-activity coding frame (Section 3.4) Implemented the deterministic per-step tagging predicates. Induced, tested, and pruned the categories, fixed the tagging rules. Artefact: structured per-step records that any reader can re-code. Canonical evaluation platform (Section 3.6, Section E) Drafted the harness code (Docker pinning, gauntlet orchestration, Bradley–Terry fit). Designed anchors, time control, and adjudication, checked calibration against externally rated opponents. Artefacts: PGNs, configurations, scripts. Statistics and paper tables Drafted the scripts that compute Elo aggregates and emit the LaTeX tables. Verified formulas and numbers. The generators are the single source of the published tables. Artefact: generator scripts in the replication package. Per-engine reports and synthesis (Section 3.2) Drafted the narratives from tagged evidence. Reviewed each report against its evidence pointers, re-verified every claim promoted into the paper. Artefacts: 45 per-engine reports and cross-project syntheses in reports/ .Manuscript Drafted and edited LaTeX text under author direction. Set structure, framing, and claims, revised all text, checked all numbers against the generated tables. Artefacts: paper sources and table generators. Do PLs still matter to AI coding agent teammates? 71 

H Self-assessment against the LLM-study reporting guidelines 

We self-assessed this paper against the reporting checklist (version 2026.06) that accompanies the community guidelines for empirical studies in software engineering involving LLMs (Baltes et al., 2025). Table 15 maps each checklist area to the places in the paper that address it and names the residual gaps plainly rather than claiming blanket compliance. The recurring gaps trace back to two structural facts about the study: it observes commercial agents whose internals and decoding parameters are not user-controllable, and raw Claude Code transcripts are stored client-side by the product, so the released record of Claude Code interaction is the committed derived snapshot. 72 M. Acher, J.-M. Jézéquel 

Table 15 Checklist areas of the LLM-study reporting guidelines (Baltes et al., 2025), where this paper addresses them, and residual gaps. Checklist area Where addressed Status and residual gap Declare LLM usage (study, analysis, writing) Sections 2.1 and 3.2, Section G, LLM-use declaration Addressed. Model and tool versions, configuration, dates Sections 2.1 and 3.1, timestamps in the data snapshot Partial. Claude Code CLI versions are not recorded in the released snapshot. Decoding parameters are vendor defaults, not exposed to users. Prompts and interaction design Section 3.1, Figure 1, per-prompt audit in the artefact Addressed. Initial template published verbatim, all 374 follow-up prompts audited. Session traces Data and code availability statement, provenance notes in the artefact Partial. Codex rollouts released with PII redaction. Claude Code 

interaction released as the derived snapshot of 2026-04-20, raw JSONLs are stored client-side and not released. Benchmarks and metrics Sections 2.3, 3.6 and 7, Section E Addressed. The Elo construct, its calibration, and its limits are discussed in Section 9. Non-determinism and repetitions Section 9 (conclusion validity), Section E.10 Partial. One to three sessions per language cell, justified by cost and by the existential form of the headline claims. Elo rests on repeated games with confidence intervals. Human validation and coding reliability Sections 3.3 and 3.5, Section 9 Partial. Single human coder, no human-versus-human agreement statistic. Deterministic re-coding is possible from released records. Open-weight baseline Section 9 Not done. Named as a measurable follow-up for which our artefacts provide ground truth. Contamination and memorisation Sections 5.2 and 6.3, Section 9 Addressed on the output side via the novelty audit. Training-data fluency confound acknowledged as open. Replication package Data and code availability statement, Section F Addressed. The known gap is the raw Claude Code transcripts, which are stored client-side and not part of the artefact. Resources and justification Sections 3.2 and 8, Section G Addressed. Tokens and canonical USD reported. Energy not instrumented.