Title: FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=FQQ4476dT2

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
## FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Wenzhe Li 1 Zihan Ding 1 Seth Karten 1 Chi Jin 1

Abstract 

Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) heavily rely on a variety of well-designed bench-marks, which provide environmental platforms and consistent criteria to evaluate existing and novel algorithms. Specifically, in multi-agent RL (MARL), a plethora of benchmarks based on co-operative games have spurred the development of algorithms that improve the scalability of cooper-ative multi-agent systems. However, for the com-petitive setting, a lightweight and open-sourced benchmark with challenging gaming dynamics and visual inputs has not yet been established. In this work, we present FightLadder, a real-time fighting game platform, to empower competitive MARL research. Along with the platform, we pro-vide implementations of state-of-the-art MARL algorithms for competitive games, as well as a set of evaluation metrics to characterize the perfor-mance and exploitability of agents. We demon-strate the feasibility of this platform by training a general agent that consistently defeats 12 built-in characters in single-player mode, and expose the difficulty of training a non-exploitable agent without human knowledge and demonstrations in two-player mode. FightLadder provides metic-ulously designed environments to address criti-cal challenges in competitive MARL research, aiming to catalyze a new era of discovery and advancement in the field. Videos and code at https://sites.google.com/view/fightladder/home. 

1. Introduction 

As an active branch of artificial intelligence (AI), deep rein-forcement learning (DRL) has achieved significant success in various domains, including, but not limited to, strategic             

> 1Princeton University. Correspondence to: Wenzhe Li <wen-zhe.li@princeton.edu>, Chi Jin <chij@princeton.edu>.
> Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).
> Figure 1. FightLadder currently supports various cross-platform video fighting games: Street Fighter II (Genesis platform), Street Fighter III (Arcade platform), Fatal Fury 2 (Genesis platform),
> Mortal Kombat (Genesis platform), and The King of Fighters ’97
> (Neo Geo platform).

games (Silver et al., 2016; Li et al., 2020; Morav vcík et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019), robotics control (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Andrychowicz et al., 2020b; Brohan et al., 2022), and large language models align-ment (Ouyang et al., 2022). Underpinning these rapid ad-vances are not only the development of sample-efficient RL algorithms but also the availability of well-designed bench-marks. These benchmarks provide environmental platforms, unify evaluation protocols, enable comparisons of state-of-the-art methods, motivate improved solutions, and guide practical applications. As an example, policy proximal optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) demonstrates its superior performance across different single-agent RL benchmarks, hence being considered as one of the most widely adopted single-agent RL algorithms (Andrychowicz et al., 2020a). In the realm of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), while a series of benchmarks have also been proposed, most of them focus on fully cooperative settings. For competitive environments, some platforms simulate games with tabular representations and relatively simple dynamics, such as board games, while others, based on complex game engines, require significant computational resources and expert knowledge, such as Starcraft II and DOTA. To advance research on competitive multi-agent rein-forcement learning (MARL) and transform game-theoretical results into practical applications, a fully competitive game platform that strikes the right balance between complexity, efficiency, and generality is urgently needed. 1FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Multi-agent games are known to be more challenging than single-agent ones due to the additional non-stationarity in-troduced by the interactions with other players. Among different types of interactions, fully competitive settings can be rather difficult. People have a long history of de-signing and playing competitive games, as well as building strong AI opponents to make the game more challenging and hence intriguing. Previous AI research has investigated the solutions of competitive games using RL, but mostly for small-scale games like Backgammon (Tesauro et al., 1995) or other board games (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Brown & Sandholm, 2018; 2019). Moreover, this line of work mostly uses state vectors as inputs, which is arguably easier than directly learning from raw pixel inputs that commonly ap-pear in most popular video games. In contrast, this paper considers fighting games, which feature rich policy space, and significant depth in strategy — including catching spe-cific timing, counter-attack by exploiting the stiffness of the opponents, managing energy resources, etc. Moreover, these games also have a rather large number of characters with distinct move-sets which add another layer of complex-ity for AI agents to master the game. As a result, we are motivated to build a platform for a series of fighting games, with image inputs and complex fighting dynamics, to serve as a challenging competitive multi-player platform for the broad AI research community. Apart from the game platform, the evaluation criteria and benchmark results for certain game settings are essential for boosting the field. MARL has been greatly investigated in the past few years for solving multi-player games, from both theoretical and empirical perspectives. A large number of algorithms have been proposed according to specific settings (Sunehag et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2022; Lowe et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2018; Lanctot et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2022). Nonetheless, for competitive game settings, there is a lack of unified evaluation criteria with thorough comparisons among different approaches. In this work, we present FightLadder, a competitive two-player games benchmark. Our contributions are three-fold: We build the FightLadder platform to support five two-player fighting games, with ease to extend to other games in the future. The games support various observation spaces involving rendered images. Based on prior work, we pro-vide implementations of the most popular algorithms for solving these competitive games, including an AlphaStar league training algorithm (Vinyals et al., 2019) and pol-icy space response oracle (Lanctot et al., 2017). Further-more, a unified evaluation framework with Elo rating and 

exploitability tests are provided alongside the game plat-forms and algorithm library. We report experimental results using the above toolkits to serve as the baselines for two-player competitive game settings. One important challenge of MARL is its diverse nature, which includes collaborative games, competitive games, two-player games, and multi-player games, all of which have rather different problem structures, properties, and solution concepts. While it is promising to develop a unified solution that addresses them all together, in this work, we empirically demonstrate that 

to some extent, existing methods are still limited in solving competitive two-player zero-sum games alone when com-bined with visual input, rich strategy space, and lack of extensive human demonstration . We hope that FightLadder, which particularly focuses on this fundamental two-player setting, can serve as a stepping stone for the research com-munity to develop effective self-play style algorithms to tackle it first before moving on to even more complicated scenarios, and inspire future directions that involve more types of interactions. 

2. Related Work 

MARL Environments. MARL environments can be cate-gorized into three types according to the payoff structure of the game: fully cooperative , fully competitive , and general .Existing environments for fully cooperative games are de-signed for various scenarios, including simulated games like MAMuJoCo (Peng et al., 2021), card games like Han-abi (Bard et al., 2020), video games like small-scale Star-Craft SMAC (Samvelyan et al., 2019) and Google Research Football (Kurach et al., 2020), as well as practical sce-narios like Traffic Junction (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016) in a grid world, Flatland (Mohanty et al., 2020) for railway net-works, network load balancing (Yao & Ding, 2022) and CityFlow (Zhang et al., 2019) for city traffic. Cooperative environments feature a single reward function shared by all agents, which makes them distinct from competitive games. On the other hand, the fully competitive game benchmarks are relatively underdeveloped. Prior competitive environ-ments are either on games with low-dimensional or dis-crete state space such as Pommerman (Resnick et al., 2018) and board games (Tesauro et al., 1995; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Brown & Sandholm, 2018); or complex games with image input that require a significant amount of computa-tional resources, such as Starcraft II (Vinyals et al., 2019) or DOTA (Berner et al., 2019). The fighting game envi-ronments proposed in this paper strike the right balance be-tween complexity, efficiency, and generality. A few previous works also have explored fighting games: Go et al. (2023) focuses on developing an algorithm for a single fighting game—street fighter, as opposed to this paper which pro-vides an environment that supports various fighting games. While Palmas (2022) provides a platform for fighting games, most of its efforts have been focused on the single-agent setting. It lacks explicit criteria for two-player scenarios with adaptive opponents, and does not provide a benchmark evaluating existing competitive MARL algorithms. Khan 2FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

et al. (2022) focuses on fighting games in the blind setting where agents have to rely on acoustic inputs to play. Finally, there are also a number of environments for gen-eral multiagent games that feature both cooperation and competition, including MPE (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018), MAgent (Zheng et al., 2018), Hide-and-Seek (Baker et al., 2019), DMLab2D (Beattie et al., 2020), Arena (Song et al., 2020), Smarts (Zhou et al., 2020), Neural MMO (Suarez et al., 2021), PettingZoo (Terry et al., 2021), MATE (Pan et al., 2022), etc. Generic multi-agent general-sum games are rather challenging to evaluate — even the optimal solu-tion concepts remain elusive. In contrast, the fully compet-itive setting considered in this paper presents clear game-theoretic properties and well-defined solution concepts. We also remark that while a number of the platforms above sup-port several fully competitive games, they did not provide carefully designed evaluation toolkits as well as extensive baselines for competitive MARL algorithms. 

MARL Algorithms and Evaluation. To solve multi-agent learning tasks, researchers have proposed algorithms and built libraries for ease of usage and evaluation. Py-MARL (Samvelyan et al., 2019) is an initial MARL library built for solving SMAC tasks, while PyMARL2 (Hu et al., 2021) extends PyMARL with QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020). EPyMARL (Papoudakis et al., 2020) is also an extension of PyMARL, as a unified library for cooperative games sup-porting different learning paradigms including centralized and decentralized learning, value decomposition, etc. MAR-Llib (Hu et al., 2023) includes major cooperative MARL algorithms like VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017), MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017), etc. More recent libraries include Pantheonrl (Sarkar et al., 2022), MAlib (Zhou et al., 2023), etc. These libraries mainly sup-port MARL algorithms for cooperative games, lacking sup-port for solving competitive games. On the other hand, there is a line of research for solving com-petitive games with algorithms like self-play (Silver et al., 2018), fictitious play (Brown, 1951), Nash Q-learning (Hu & Wellman, 2003; Ding et al., 2022), double oracle (McMahan et al., 2003), policy space response oracle (PSRO) (Lanctot et al., 2017) and league training (Vinyals et al., 2019). A unified benchmark remains missing to compare and evaluate the efficiency these algorithms on the same set of tasks, espe-cially when combined with deep RL. This paper addresses this issue in the fully competitive setting. We concentrate on two-player zero-sum games, and propose a platform for fighting-style fully competitive games, along with a baseline implementation and evaluation of popular algorithms. 

3. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

FightLadder is designed to motivate novel algorithms for fully competitive two-player games in the domains of MARL and game theory. Markov Games (MGs) (Shapley, 1953) generalize single-player Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) into multi-player settings. Each player has its own utility and optimizes its policy to maximize the utility. The two-player zero-sum setting in MG represents a competitive relationship between the two players. With a shaped dense reward, the games can be generalized to general-sum. We denote a finite-horizon two-player general-sum partially observable MG as POMG( S, O, A, B, P, O, {r}2

> i=1

, H ).

S is the state space, which can be partially observable and transformed through an observation emission function O:

S → O to the observation space O. A and B are action spaces for two players, respectively. P(·| s, a, b ) is the state transition distribution, ri : S × A × B → R is the re-ward function for the i-th player. In the zero-sum setting, two reward functions satisfy the zero-sum payoff structure 

r1 + r2 = 0 . H is the horizon length. We denote the poli-cies of two players as μ and ν, respectively. V μ,ν i : S → R

represents the value function for player i evaluated with policies μ and ν, which can be expanded as the expected cumulative reward starting from the state s,

V μ,ν i (s) := Eμ,ν 

 P ∞ 

> h=1

ri(sh, a h, b h) s1 = s.

In zero-sum games, we have V μ,ν  

> 1

(s) = −V μ,ν  

> 2

(s), ∀s ∈ S 

and define V μ,ν (s) = V μ,ν  

> 1

(s) for simplicity. 

Definition 3.1 (Best Response) . For any policy of the first player μ, there exists a best response (BR) against it from the second player, which is a policy ν†(μ) satisfying 

V μ,ν †(μ)2,h (s) = max ν V μ,ν  

> 2,h

(s) for any (s, h ) ∈ S × [H]. We denote V μ, † 

> 2,h

:= V μ,ν †(μ)2,h for simplification. V μ,ν  

> 2,h

(s) is the value function of the second player. BR against the second player can be defined similarly. 

Definition 3.2 (Nash Equilibrium) . The Nash equilibrium 

(NE) in zero-sum setting is defined as a pair of policies 

(μ⋆, ν ⋆) satisfying the following minimax equation: 

max  

> μ

min  

> ν

V μ,ν (s) = V μ⋆,ν ⋆

(s) = min  

> ν

max  

> μ

V μ,ν (s).

Definition 3.3 (Exploitability) . The exploitability for a pol-icy μ of the first player is defined as V μ, † 

> 2

(s1) − V μ⋆,ν ⋆ 

> 2

(s1),i.e., the value of its BR policy ν†(μ) or the suboptimality gap from the NE value. The exploitability of the other side policy ν can be defined accordingly. Note that NE strategies will always lead to zero exploitabil-ity, thus approaching the non-exploitable strategies is a rea-sonable pursuit for the game. 

4. FightLadder 

In this section, we present technical details of FightLadder. In the following part, we first introduce different game set-tings of FightLadder, followed by elaborating elements of 3FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

MGs corresponding to the environment, and conclude with highlighting features of our benchmark. 

4.1. Scenarios 

FightLadder provides a flexible interface between modern game emulators (Murphy, 2013; Nichol et al., 2018) and algorithm developers. Thanks to its flexibility, FightLadder can support a wide range of classical fighting games over the past decades, including Street Fighter, Mortal Kombat, Fatal Fury, and The King of Fighters, some of which are still very popular nowadays. Figure 1 shows screenshots of several fighting games provided by FightLadder. With this diverse set of supported games, we can benchmark algorithms on various fighting scenarios differing in backgrounds, char-acters, and moving dynamics, which can further motivate novel algorithms that are general rather than overfitting to one specific game. For better readability and clarity, we would use Street Fighter as an example for illustration and evaluation in the rest of the paper. The other fighting games are very similar, and readers could refer to Appendix A.2 for more details. We name each scenario in the form [game alias]_[character left]_vs_[character right] , for example 

sf_ryu_vs_ryu in Street Fighter. While FightLadder mainly focuses on the competitive two-player setting, the nature of fighting games allows it to be seamlessly deployed to the single-player scenario where the agent’s task is to compete against a built-in game AI (e.g., 

sf_ryu_vs_ryu(cpu) ). Under this single-player setting, users have the freedom to choose characters and set up the diffi-culty of the scripted AI opponent. Moreover, our benchmark also supports training in a much more challenging full-game scenario (e.g., sf_ryu_full_game ), where the agent needs to defeat all 12 characters controlled by computers with the difficulty progressively increasing. As we shall see in later experiments, this scenario could also serve as a sanity check for our baseline algorithms to see whether they could learn effective behaviors from the environment. 

4.2. State and Observations 

We define the state space S as the complete set of attributes stored in the game emulator after each step of action. Same as human players, the agent is not allowed to access the underlying full state but can only access the observation space O of pixels, which forms a 128 ×100 RGB image corresponding to the rendered screen. This image includes the position and movement of both sides of the players, as well as the hit-point bar and the round timer on the top of the screen. At every step, a configurable number of images are stacked as the input of the agent. While we use pixels as default observations, we also provide an interface for users to access additional information about the game status, including position, hit-point, and exact  

> Figure 2. Motion and attack action spaces of fighting games. Im-ages are adapted from Instruction Manual of Street Fighter II.

countdown number for agents on both sides. Users can leverage these attributes to better understand the agent’s behavior or augment feature representations. More details are provided in Appendix A.2. 

4.3. Action Space 

In fighting games, two players share the same action space 

A. The native human action space Ahuman is designed to mimic the joystick control of arcade games, which is a 12-dimensional binary space ([’B’, ’A’, ’MODE’, ’START’, ’UP’, ’DOWN’, ’LEFT’, ’RIGHT’, ’C’, ’Y’, ’X’, ’Z’]) with each dimension representing a button being pressed or not. Note that due to the nature of fighting game engines, this space contains many redundant actions that are invalid, for instance, moving in opposite directions or moving and at-tacking at the same moment. To filter out these redundant actions and to construct a more structured space, we develop a categorical transformed action space Atrans through an en-coding function F : Ahuman → A trans . Specifically, Atrans is the joint set of a direction move set Amotion ={defense, for-ward, jump, crouch, back flip, front flip, offensive crouch, defensive crouch} and an attack move set Aattack ={light punch, medium punch, hard punch, light kick, medium kick, hard kick}, as shown in Figure 2. Each action will remain a number of frames according to users’ configuration. The games also have special techniques called close attack , i.e., Throws and Holds, which can be applied in certain regions near the opponent. In addition to the standard move set, one signature element of fighting games is special moves , which is a kind of pow-erful attack or maneuver that requires the player to follow a specific action sequence (i.e., sequential keys combination, or combination of key holding and key pressing), with an example depicted in Figure 3. These moves usually have special properties (e.g., invincibility frames, larger coverage, etc.) and play a critical role in the strategy and depth of the game. They are especially useful for higher levels of play, from which players could create complex combos and outperform opponents. However, we observe that learning to perform special moves from scratch can be challenging to baseline algorithms, as it requires the agent to memo-rize frames and actions in previous steps and accurately perform the next action in the action sequence of special 4FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning  

> Figure 3. Example of special moves for character Ryu in Street-Fighter II (left to right): Fireball, Dragon Punch, Hurricane Kick. Images are adapted from Instruction Manual of Street Fighter II.

moves. Moreover, the special moves can be different from character to character, which increases the difficulty of the game. Therefore, to alleviate this challenge, we also include hard-coded special move lists as one part of the action space so that the agent can directly access special moves with one single action. 

4.4. Rewards Sparse Reward. Both sides of the agents are to maximize their win rate for each round of the game. The sparse re-ward rsparse assigns +1 for the winner and -1 for the loser at the end of each episode. In the sparse reward setting, all fighting games are two-player zero-sum games, which are theoretically guaranteed to exist at least one Nash Equilib-rium (Filar & Vrieze, 2012), which directly induces a pair of non-exploitable policies. 

Win Rate. For two players A and B, policy πA winning against policy πB can be defined as a reward relationship 

rA

> sparse

(πA, π B ) > r B

> sparse

(πA, π B ) in a single match, with 

rA 

> sparse

and rB 

> sparse

as the sparse reward for players A and B in the zero-sum setting. The win rate is defined as the probability of winning as p(πA ≻ πB ).

Shaped Dense Reward. While sparse reward is straight-forward for evaluation, we discover that baseline algorithms could not effectively learn to behave well from such a sparse signal. To address this issue, we introduce a shaped dense reward rdense for training, which is a weighted sum of the hit-point damage inflicted by the agent on the opponent and the damage it receives, together with a bonus (penalty) for winning (losing) the game. Specific format of this reward refers to Appendix A.1. The dense reward rdense is chosen to coincide with the win rate of the policy, such that πA ≻ πB

will always lead to rA

> dense

(πA, π B ) > r B

> dense

(πA, π B ) in ex-pectation. The dense reward also offers some flexibility, that the user can control the agent’s aggressiveness by configur-ing the weighing scales in the reward function. 

4.5. Features 

We remark on the following features of the proposed bench-mark that could benefit MARL research.  

> Table 1. FPS and memory usage of several open-sourced platforms.

Environment Speed (FPS) Memory (MB) 

FightLadder (Ours) 1935.76 195.46 SMACv2 146.72 876.96 PettingZoo Atari 6268.18 32.13 DMLab2D 1144.27 47.41 

Rich Strategy Space. One key feature of our benchmark is the rich strategy space as the nature of fighting games, which is particularly beneficial to the development of game-theoretical algorithms. To name a few, fighting games re-quire players to consider (a) character diversity: each character has a unique skill set with different strengths and weaknesses, so one needs to master the strategy and counter-strategy of all possible opponents, and even reason how to select and order characters when they have the freedom to do so; (b) complexity of mechanics: fighting games are designed with sophisticate mechanics such as invincibility frame, hitboxes, and combo systems, which are challenging for micromanagement of characters; and (c) adversarial op-ponents: opponents may progressively adapt their policies to players’ policies, thus finding non-exploitable policies is crucial in mastering fighting games. 

Various Difficulty Levels. FightLadder provides sev-eral kinds of scenarios: single-player mode against one CPU player (e.g., sf_ryu_vs_ryu(cpu) ), single-player mode full game (e.g., sf_ryu_full_game ), two-player mode (e.g., 

sf_ryu_vs_ryu ), team mode (supported in some games such as The King of Fighters). The difficulty levels are increasing in this order, as two-player mode (no CPU) introduces addi-tional non-stationary (opponents can be adaptive), and team mode offers a richer strategy space. Moreover, FightLadder supports specifying arbitrary difficulty levels of CPUs and 

arbitrary characters for both the player and its opponent. This enriches the features of our platform and the diversity of strategy space. 

Computational Efficiency. FightLadder also enjoys ef-ficient computation for its usage, and the comparison with several other popular game environments is shown in Ta-ble 1. The frame rate is 13 times faster than SMACv2, with one-fourth usage of the memory. While it is less effi-cient than FightLadder is the PettingZoo Atari, it provides more game complexity. The balance of complexity and low computational cost is important for evaluating algorithms at scale. 

Fidelity and Popularity. FightLadder allows testing agents in full-length fighting games with an interface similar to human perception, thus providing a high-fidelity evalu-ation of competitive RL algorithms. Moreover, fighting 5FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

games have been gaining popularity since they were re-leased, making it easier to test the learned RL agents against human expert players. 

Open-Source and Compatibility. FightLadder is de-signed for the broad RL research community, so we make efforts to improve the ease of usage and make it accessible to all potential users. It is compatible with the Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) interface so that users can leverage off-the-shelf RL algorithms implementation. 

Customization, Extension, and Flexibility. FightLadder is extremely flexible for configuration and extension. For customization, the users can customize action spaces (hu-man/transformed action), reward functions (sparse/tunable shaped dense reward), number of frames to be observed per step, as well as access to additional information to help train-ing. Moreover, our platform is built upon popular modern game emulators so that it is easy to extend to other games not provided by us. Specifically, it supports Gym Retro and MAMEToolkit, which already support a wide range of games. This extension capability of diverse games is provided by our platform with minimal engineering efforts. Please check our open-source project 1 for more details. 

5. Evaluation Metrics 

Versus Built-In Game AIs. Directly competing with the built-in AIs of the games provides a straightforward way of measuring policy performance. Typically, fighting games offer a hierarchical structure of levels, enabling players to adjust the difficulty setting (for example, Street Fighter features eight distinct levels). This structure allows for the empirical evaluation of the policy against the game’s scripted AI at varying levels of challenge. It is important to acknowledge, however, that the limitations associated with hard-coded adversaries restrict the extent to which this metric can accurately reflect the policy’s real capability. For brevity, we shall refer to such agents as CPU. 

Elo Ratings. The skills of agents can be ranked through the FIDE rating system (Elo & Sloan, 1978), which is an in-cremental learning system that increases the Elo of winners and decreases the Elo of losers. The larger the difference in Elo between players A and B, the higher the probability that the player with the higher Elo, A, beats the player with the lower Elo, B. The Elo score calculation takes the following procedures: First, the probability of player A winning is estimated with, 

pA := p(πA ≻ πB ) = (1 .0 + 10 Elo B −Elo A 

> 400

)−1.

> 1https://sites.google.com/view/fightladder/home

Then the Elo rating for player A as Elo A will be updated with following formula: Elo A = Elo A + k · (1[winner = A] − pA),

where k is a constant of update rate. The update is symmet-ric for player B, as well as any other player in the ranking system. 

Versus AI Exploiters. As discussed in Section 3, ex-ploitability (as Definition 3.3) measures the distance of a policy to the Nash equilibrium of the game. Specifically, the exploitability of a policy μ is measured by the win rate of its BR policy ν†(μ) against μ, since V μ⋆,ν ⋆

(s1) = 0 

for symmetric zero-sum game and V μ, † 

> 2

(s1) = 1 · p(ν ≻

μ) + 0 · p(ν ⪯ μ) = p(ν ≻ μ) for sparse reward setting. In practice, we can use any single-agent deep RL algorithm as an exploiter to approximately learn the BR policy ν†(μ).For fair comparisons, we should use one consistent exploiter (same RL algorithm with same configurations) to evaluate the exploitability of different baselines. 

Versus Human Players. While Definition 3.3 is a general metric to measure exploitability, it may be limited to the capability of deep RL algorithms in usage. Therefore, we also provide an interface for human players such that they can play with any learned model with convenience. This feature will show the strengths and weaknesses of agents di-rectly and visibly, and motivate developers to improve their algorithms to be more non-exploitable in general. Given the remarkable success of modern RL algorithms outperforming expert human players in various video games (Mnih et al., 2013; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019), we believe that FightLadder will emerge as a promising platform for the broad competitive MARL community and researchers will eventually build AI agents that could beat world champions in a much richer set of strategic games with significantly less engineering efforts. 

6. FightLadder-Baselines 

For the convenience of the community to evaluate existing methods and new algorithms on FightLadder platform, we open-source the implementation of several state-of-the-art (SOTA) competitive MARL algorithms, including indepen-dent learning (de Witt et al., 2020), two-timescale learn-ing (Daskalakis et al., 2020), fictitious self-play (Heinrich et al., 2015), policy-space response oracle (Lanctot et al., 2017) and league training (Vinyals et al., 2019). Our code-base supports decentralized learning across multiple GPUs, and it is built upon Stable-Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021) so that users can leverage off-the-shelf implementations of RL algorithms. We choose proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) as the backbone policy op-6FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

timization algorithm in our experiments. More details of baseline algorithms refer to Appendix B. 

7. Results 

In this section, we provide benchmark results on a selected game in FightLadder–the Street Fighter. We aim to answer the following questions through our benchmark: (a) Can existing RL algorithms solve the full video game in the single-player scenario? (b) How does the performance of state-of-the-art baseline algorithms in the two-player com-petitive setting compare? and (c) Does multi-agent training help to improve the non-exploitability? 

7.1. Single-Player Full Video Game 

To answer question (a) , we evaluate PPO’s performance in the scenario sf_ryu_full_game with human action space as a feasibility check. As mentioned in Section 4, this scenario requires the agent to learn a generalizable policy to compete against all different characters with increasing difficulty levels. Curriculum learning is applied to train the policy from easy to hard cases. Furthermore, to improve learning efficiency we develop a curriculum scheduler for opponent sampling to match with the learner after each epoch. More specifically, for the current learner L with policy πL, we sample its opponent C from the entire character set C, with the following inverse-weight scheduling distribution: 

C ∼ ∆( C) ∝ 1 − p(πL ≻ πC ),

where p(πL ≻ πC ) is the win rate of the learner against the opponent and ∆( ·) is the simplex. Intuitively, such a curriculum will encourage the agent to focus on the hardest opponents, similarly to prioritized experience play (Schaul et al., 2015). We defer other implementation details to Appendix C. Figure 4 shows the performance of our proposed method during training. With 20 epochs of training (each epoch involves 10M training steps competing with opponents sam-pled from the curriculum scheduler in parallel), the agent is capable of defeating characters at each level with a win rate close to 1. In addition to beating each character with a high probability, the trained policy can complete the full video game with over 0.6 win rate, outperforming human players with hours of playing experience. This result shows that existing RL algorithms can already learn a well-behaved policy to solve the full single-player video game, which provides a good starting point for exploring the multi-agent setting. As an additional experiment, we also test the inclusion of hard-coded special move lists in this setting with exactly the same algorithm implementation. Although it could be easier for the agent to learn more offensive policies, significant improvement in the overall win rate is not observed. It indicates that the agents without encoded special moves can also effectively learn policies against CPUs. Constantly playing special moves will lead to a vulnerable situation for the agent, whereas the defensive strategy also matters greatly in the game. Moreover, given that an experienced human player can perform special moves easily (by executing the action sequences almost instantly), we do not think that hard-coded special move lists will become the advantage of trained agents over human players. 

7.2. Performance of Two-Player Baseline Algorithms 

To answer question (b) , we evaluate five SOTA algorithms mentioned in Section 6: independent PPO (IPPO), two-timescale IPPO (2Timescale), fictitious self-play (FSP), policy-space response oracles (PSRO), and league train-ing (League) in the scenario sf_ryu_vs_ryu . IPPO and 2Timescale can be categorized into the independent learn-ing paradigm, while FSP, PSRO, and League can be cate-gorized into the population-based learning paradigm. For each algorithm, we initialize the population of agents with a pretrained policy in sf_ryu_vs_ryu(cpu) against the most difficult CPU 2. We use the transformed actions Atrans with hard-coded special moves to unleash the full potential for agents. As a fair comparison, we use the same codebase (FightLadder-Baselines) and fix the hyperparameters of the backbone PPO algorithm. We train IPPO and 2Timescale for approximately 50M steps until the Elos saturate across all three seeds, FSP and PSRO for approximately 250M steps, and League for approximately 700M steps due to a larger population. A slice of the league during the league training process is visualized in Figure 5 Please refer to Appendix C for more implementation details. For each algorithm, we report the training Elos of agents in the population during the course of training, respectively. The results are shown in Appendix D, which reveal that all baseline algorithms are improving their policies at the onset of training. Subsequently, IPPO and 2Timescale grad-ually converge and oscillate around the peak Elos, where FSP, PSRO, and League continue to increase their scores. This suggests that IPPO and 2Timescale may suffer from optimization issues during training and population-based methods may be more suitable for policy learning in fighting games. To compare different baseline algorithms, we select the top ten agents (five on each left or right side) from each algo-rithm to form a new population, and compute the test Elos for this group of agents and CPU policies. We report the highest Elos for each algorithm in Table 2 and the distribu-tion of these agents’ Elos in Figure 6, where we find that     

> 2We do not pre-train in sf_ryu_full_game as sf_ryu_vs_ryu does not require skills to compete with other characters rather than Ryu.

7FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> Win Rate

Level 1 (Guile) Level 2 (Ken) Level 3 (Chun-Li) Level 5 (Zangief) Level 6 (Dhalsim) Level 7 (Ryu) 

0 10 20 

Epoch 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> Win Rate

Level 9 (E. Honda) 

0 10 20 

Epoch 

Level 10 (Blanka) 

0 10 20 

Epoch 

Level 11 (Balrog) 

0 10 20 

Epoch 

Level 13 (Vega) 

0 10 20 

Epoch 

Level 14 (Sagat) 

0 10 20 

Epoch 

Level 15 (M. Bison) 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> Schedule Dist.

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> Schedule Dist.

Figure 4. The win rate curves and the scheduling distribution bar plot in sf_ryu_full_game via the proposed PPO with curriculum learning. Opponents of different characters are marked with different levels. Levels 4, 8, and 12 are omitted as they are bonus levels without fighting. ME0_right_h_10M                                        

> ME0_right
> MA0_right_h_20M
> MA0_right_h_10M
> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right_h_10M
> LE1_right
> LE0_right_h_10M
> LE0_right
> LE0_left
> LE0_left_h_10M
> LE0_left_h_20M
> LE1_left
> LE1_left_h_10M
> LE1_left_h_20M
> MA0_left
> MA0_left_h_0M
> MA0_left_h_10M
> MA0_left_h_20M
> ME0_left
> ME0_left_h_10M
> 0.94 0.66 0.87 0.97 0.93 0.97
> 0.09 0.10 0.08
> 0.29 0.08 0.21
> 0.86 0.47 0.84 0.90 0.82 0.86
> 0.21 0.03 0.04
> 0.35 0.41 0.38
> 0.93 0.91 0.77 0.95 0.95 0.45 0.88 0.90
> 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.02
> 0.14 0.25 0.22 0.17
> 0.25 0.26 0.25 0.29
> 0.43 0.98 1.00 0.06
> 0.26 0.31 0.31
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0

Figure 5. The payoff matrix for each pair of agents at a cer-tain stage of League training. For league training, there is one main agent (MA), two league exploiters (LE0, LE1), and one main exploiter (ME) for each side (left or right). The name of each row indicates the agent information as 

Character_Side_Checkpoint . Checkpoint=h_xM 

represents a historical version of agent saved at x million steps. The value indicates the win rate of the left (row) player against the right (column) player. For instance, ME0_right wins all 

MA0_left_h_xM with high probability, indicating that main ex-ploiters in the league can fully exploit previous main agents. Also the high win rate of MA0_left against all right agents (except 

MA0_right ) shows that the main agent at current steps outper-forms other agents in the league. 0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 0

1

2

3

4

5

> Count

Left 

IPPO 

League 

2Timescale 

PSRO 

FSP 

CPU 

0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 

Elo 

0

2

4

6

> Count

Right 

Figure 6. The distribution of Elo ratings for top ten agents from each baseline. 

League and PSRO significantly outperform other baselines, and population-based methods deliver better results than independent learning counterparts, which is aligned with our previous observation inspecting Elos of baselines indi-vidually. On the other hand, we notice that CPU policies may defeat most of the agents in this group except for a few best-performing agents, suggesting that it is still very chal-lenging for existing SOTA algorithms to reach an advanced or superhuman level of performance in these fighting games. We also noticed that two sides of agents reveal asymmetric strengths in terms of Elos in both individual evaluation for each algorithm (Appendix D Figure 10-14) and overall eval-uations across algorithms (Table 2). Such an imbalance may result from various factors, for instance, optimizing instabil-ity, variance from the population or Elos computation, etc, and can be an interesting research question for future work. 8FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning                      

> Table 2. Comparison of training steps and the best Elo ratings among baselines, with CPU’s Elos as references.
> Method Training Steps (Left/Right) Elo (Left/Right) IPPO 46M / 46M 1082 / 1164 League 647M / 630M 1682 /1503
> 2Timescale 51M / 46M 1080 / 919 PSRO 176M / 161M 1262 / 1517
> FSP 262M / 244M 1079 / 1150 CPU N/A 1395 / 1541
> Table 3. Comparison of methods’ exploitability. A lower number indicates the evaluated policy is more robust to exploitation.

Method Exploitability (Left/Right) IPPO 0.96 ± 0.03 / 0.91 ± 0.03 League 0.94 ± 0.05 / 0.94 ± 0.00 2Timescale 0.96 ± 0.02 / 0.90 ± 0.05 PSRO 0.97 ± 0.02 / 0.88 ± 0.05 

FSP 1.00 ± 0.00 / 0.95 ± 0.01 PPO 0.99 ± 0.02 / 0.99 ± 0.01 

7.3. Non-Exploitability of Trained Agents 

To answer question (c) , we measure the non-exploitability of baseline algorithms according to the evaluation approaches proposed in Section 5. More specifically, we choose models with the highest Elos from each two-player baseline algo-rithm respectively, and compare their exploitability with the single-player pretrained model used for initializing the population-based methods in Section 7.2. The practical exploitability is calculated by setting the trained policy fixed on one side, and deploying a PPO agent on the other side as an exploiter. The PPO exploiter will be trained until convergence, and the success rate of the ex-ploiter is the estimated exploitability of the original policy, according to Definition 3.3. 

Single-Agent RL Exploiters. We use PPO as the algo-rithm for training exploiters, given its decent performance in both single-player and two-player scenarios shown in pre-vious experiments. Table 3 shows the exploitability of com-paring methods evaluated across three seeds, from which we observe that the single-player pretrained policy via PPO is easier to exploit and suffers from higher exploitability than almost all selected policies from two-player baselines. Therefore, this result indicates that two-player learning al-gorithms such as League and PSRO can help to improve the robustness of learned policies. On the other hand, the PPO exploiter eventually learns to beat policies from all baselines (with a win rate greater than 0.5), which means that none of these algorithms can result in the exact Nash equilibrium policies, or even close to it. Therefore, closing this gap is a challenging direction for future research. 

Human Players as Exploiters. In addition to exploiting the learned models with RL algorithms, we also attempt to exploit their policies with human effort. During human evaluations, the evaluated models reveal some robustness to human players (e.g., defend when a human player at-tacks), but some simple strategies (e.g., defensive posture combined with low kicks at proper timing) could still de-feat them rather consistently. Visualizations are provided in Appendix E. Therefore, based on two exploiting experiments, we observe that existing competitive MARL algorithms are found hard to learn non-exploitable strategies in competitive fighting games like Street Fighter , thus raising a new challenge for the research community. 

8. Conclusion and Limitation 

In this paper, we present the FightLadder platform and evalu-ation benchmarks as a novel testbed for competitive MARL research. The platform supports various video action games including the popular Street Fighter series, with flexible support for new game integration. We further provide experimental evaluations of present RL and MARL algorithms in both single-player and two-player modes of one specific game Street Fighter. In the single-player setting, we proposed a learning scheme based on curriculum learning. It trains a general RL agent that can consistently beat CPUs across different characters. In the two-player setting, the Elo rating and exploitability test are conducted as part of the proposed evaluation criteria. Our implementation of league training and PSRO provides stronger agents than FSP and IPPO in terms of Elo ratings. However, both single-agent RL and human players are ca-pable of exploiting all agents learned by current widely adopted algorithms. Our current work is limited to fully competitive two-player games. One important challenge of MARL is its diverse nature, which includes collaborative games, competitive games, two-player games, and multiplayer games, all of which have rather different problem structures and solution concepts. The more general setting, which involves more than two players and both cooperation and competition, is not yet explored and should be an important future direction. Although FightLadder supports multiple fighting games, our current results are mostly conducted on Street Fighter, and we are curious to see more results on other games. This work motivates further research in developing more efficient and effective self-play algorithms finding non-exploitable strategies. We hope that our platform prompts general interest and more extensive research in competitive MARL and serves as a standard benchmark for developing practically useful self-play training paradigms. 9FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by Office of Naval Research N00014-22-1-2253, National Science Foundation Grant NSF-IIS-2107304, and National Science Foundation Grad-uate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-2039656. 

Impact Statement 

This work may advance the field of game AI, thus has po-tentials to affect the gaming experience for human players. The strong AI agents for popular fighting games may attract people’s attention to get involved in these games, or make them feel that the games can be even more challenging for human. Another positive impact is that our study promotes the research for robust systems against adversarial attacks. 

References 

Andrychowicz, M., Raichuk, A., Sta´ nczyk, P., Orsini, M., Girgin, S., Marinier, R., Hussenot, L., Geist, M., Pietquin, O., Michalski, M., et al. What matters in on-policy rein-forcement learning? a large-scale empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05990 , 2020a. Andrychowicz, O. M., Baker, B., Chociej, M., Jozefowicz, R., McGrew, B., Pachocki, J., Petron, A., Plappert, M., Powell, G., Ray, A., et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 39(1):3–20, 2020b. Baker, B., Kanitscheider, I., Markov, T., Wu, Y., Pow-ell, G., McGrew, B., and Mordatch, I. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07528 , 2019. Bard, N., Foerster, J. N., Chandar, S., Burch, N., Lanctot, M., Song, H. F., Parisotto, E., Dumoulin, V., Moitra, S., Hughes, E., et al. The hanabi challenge: A new frontier for ai research. Artificial Intelligence , 280:103216, 2020. Beattie, C., Köppe, T., Duéñez-Guzmán, E. A., and Leibo, J. Z. Deepmind lab2d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.07027 ,2020. Berner, C., Brockman, G., Chan, B., Cheung, V., D˛ ebiak, P., Dennison, C., Farhi, D., Fischer, Q., Hashme, S., Hesse, C., et al. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680 , 2019. Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. Openai gym. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540 , 2016. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J., et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. Brown, G. W. Iterative solution of games by fictitious play. 

Act. Anal. Prod Allocation , 13(1):374, 1951. Brown, N. and Sandholm, T. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats top professionals. Science ,359(6374):418–424, 2018. Brown, N. and Sandholm, T. Superhuman ai for multiplayer poker. Science , 365(6456):885–890, 2019. Daskalakis, C., Foster, D. J., and Golowich, N. Independent policy gradient methods for competitive reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:5527–5540, 2020. de Witt, C. S., Gupta, T., Makoviichuk, D., Makoviychuk, V., Torr, P. H., Sun, M., and Whiteson, S. Is indepen-dent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 , 2020. Ding, Z., Su, D., Liu, Q., and Jin, C. A deep reinforcement learning approach for finding non-exploitable strategies in two-player atari games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08894 ,2022. Domahidi, A., Chu, E., and Boyd, S. ECOS: An SOCP solver for embedded systems. In European Control Con-ference (ECC) , pp. 3071–3076, 2013. Dresher, M., Shapley, L. S., and Tucker, A. W. Advances in Game Theory.(AM-52), Volume 52 , volume 52. Princeton University Press, 2016. Elo, A. E. and Sloan, S. The rating of chessplayers: Past and present. (No Title) , 1978. Filar, J. and Vrieze, K. Competitive Markov decision pro-cesses . Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. Foerster, J., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and Whiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradi-ents. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. Go, S.-X., Jiang, Y., and Loke, D. K. A phase-change mem-ristive reinforcement learning for rapidly outperforming champion street-fighter players. Advanced Intelligent Systems , 5(11):2300335, 2023. Heinrich, J., Lanctot, M., and Silver, D. Fictitious self-play in extensive-form games. In Bach, F. and Blei, D. (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 805–813, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v37/heinrich15.html .10 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Hu, J. and Wellman, M. P. Nash q-learning for general-sum stochastic games. Journal of machine learning research ,4(Nov):1039–1069, 2003. Hu, J., Jiang, S., Harding, S. A., Wu, H., and Liao, S.-w. Rethinking the implementation tricks and monotonicity constraint in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03479 , 2021. Hu, S., Zhong, Y., Gao, M., Wang, W., Dong, H., Liang, X., Li, Z., Chang, X., and Yang, Y. Marllib: A scalable and efficient multi-agent reinforcement learning library. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(315):1–23, 2023. Khan, I., Van Nguyen, T., Dai, X., and Thawonmas, R. Dare-fightingice competition: A fighting game sound design and ai competition. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG) , pp. 478–485. IEEE, 2022. Kurach, K., Raichuk, A., Sta´ nczyk, P., Zaj ˛ ac, M., Bachem, O., Espeholt, L., Riquelme, C., Vincent, D., Michalski, M., Bousquet, O., et al. Google research football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pp. 4501–4510, 2020. Lanctot, M., Zambaldi, V., Gruslys, A., Lazaridou, A., Tuyls, K., Pérolat, J., Silver, D., and Graepel, T. A uni-fied game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Li, J., Koyamada, S., Ye, Q., Liu, G., Wang, C., Yang, R., Zhao, L., Qin, T., Liu, T.-Y., and Hon, H.-W. Suphx: Mastering mahjong with deep reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13590 , 2020. Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 , 2015. Lowe, R., Wu, Y. I., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Pieter Abbeel, O., and Mordatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 30, 2017. McMahan, H. B., Gordon, G. J., and Blum, A. Planning in the presence of cost functions controlled by an adversary. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-03) , pp. 536–543, 2003. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidje-land, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature , 518(7540): 529–533, 2015. Mohanty, S., Nygren, E., Laurent, F., Schneider, M., Scheller, C., Bhattacharya, N., Watson, J., Egli, A., Eichenberger, C., Baumberger, C., et al. Flatland-rl: Multi-agent reinforcement learning on trains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05893 , 2020. Morav vcík, M., Schmid, M., Burch, N., Lis `y, V., Morrill, D., Bard, N., Davis, T., Waugh, K., Johanson, M., and Bowling, M. Deepstack: Expert-level artificial intelli-gence in heads-up no-limit poker. Science , 356(6337): 508–513, 2017. Mordatch, I. and Abbeel, P. Emergence of grounded com-positional language in multi-agent populations. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 32, 2018. Murphy, D. Hacking public memory: Understanding the multiple arcade machine emulator. Games and Culture , 8 (1):43–53, 2013. Nichol, A., Pfau, V., Hesse, C., Klimov, O., and Schulman, J. Gotta learn fast: A new benchmark for generalization in rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03720 , 2018. Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744, 2022. Palmas, A. Diambra arena: a new reinforcement learning platform for research and experimentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10595 , 2022. Pan, X., Liu, M., Zhong, F., Yang, Y., Zhu, S.-C., and Wang, Y. Mate: Benchmarking multi-agent reinforcement learning in distributed target coverage control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27862– 27879, 2022. Papoudakis, G., Christianos, F., Schäfer, L., and Albrecht, S. V. Benchmarking multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07869 , 2020. Peng, B., Rashid, T., Schroeder de Witt, C., Kamienny, P.-A., Torr, P., Böhmer, W., and Whiteson, S. Facmac: Factored multi-agent centralised policy gradients. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 12208–12221, 2021. 11 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Raffin, A., Hill, A., Gleave, A., Kanervisto, A., Ernestus, M., and Dormann, N. Stable-baselines3: Reliable rein-forcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http: //jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html .Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(1):7234– 7284, 2020. Resnick, C., Eldridge, W., Ha, D., Britz, D., Foerster, J., Togelius, J., Cho, K., and Bruna, J. Pommerman: A multi-agent playground. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.07124 ,2018. Samvelyan, M., Rashid, T., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Nardelli, N., Rudner, T. G., Hung, C.-M., Torr, P. H., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043 , 2019. Sarkar, B., Talati, A., Shih, A., and Sadigh, D. Pantheonrl: A marl library for dynamic training interactions. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 36, pp. 13221–13223, 2022. Schaul, T., Quan, J., Antonoglou, I., and Silver, D. Priori-tized experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952 ,2015. Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis, D., Graepel, T., et al. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature , 588(7839): 604–609, 2020. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. Shapley, L. S. Stochastic games. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 39(10):1095–1100, 1953. Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. 

nature , 529(7587):484–489, 2016. Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., Lanctot, M., Sifre, L., Kumaran, D., Grae-pel, T., et al. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Sci-ence , 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. Song, Y., Wojcicki, A., Lukasiewicz, T., Wang, J., Aryan, A., Xu, Z., Xu, M., Ding, Z., and Wu, L. Arena: A general evaluation platform and building toolkit for multi-agent intelligence. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pp. 7253–7260, 2020. Suarez, J., Du, Y., Zhu, C., Mordatch, I., and Isola, P. The neural mmo platform for massively multiagent research. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07594 , 2021. Sukhbaatar, S., Fergus, R., et al. Learning multiagent com-munication with backpropagation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M., Zam-baldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat, N., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K., et al. Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296 , 2017. Tan, M. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceedings of the tenth inter-national conference on machine learning , pp. 330–337, 1993. Terry, J., Black, B., Grammel, N., Jayakumar, M., Hari, A., Sullivan, R., Santos, L. S., Dieffendahl, C., Horsch, C., Perez-Vicente, R., et al. Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:15032–15043, 2021. Tesauro, G. et al. Temporal difference learning and td-gammon. Communications of the ACM , 38(3):58–68, 1995. Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., Mathieu, M., Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D. H., Powell, R., Ewalds, T., Georgiev, P., et al. Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature , 575 (7782):350–354, 2019. Yao, Z. and Ding, Z. Learning distributed and fair policies for network load balancing as markov potential game. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 28815–28828, 2022. Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., and Wu, Y. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooper-ative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:24611–24624, 2022. Zhang, H., Feng, S., Liu, C., Ding, Y., Zhu, Y., Zhou, Z., Zhang, W., Yu, Y., Jin, H., and Li, Z. Cityflow: A multi-agent reinforcement learning environment for large scale city traffic scenario. In The world wide web conference ,pp. 3620–3624, 2019. Zheng, L., Yang, J., Cai, H., Zhou, M., Zhang, W., Wang, J., and Yu, Y. Magent: A many-agent reinforcement learning 12 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

platform for artificial collective intelligence. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 32, 2018. Zhou, M., Luo, J., Villella, J., Yang, Y., Rusu, D., Miao, J., Zhang, W., Alban, M., Fadakar, I., Chen, Z., et al. Smarts: Scalable multi-agent reinforcement learning training school for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09776 , 2020. Zhou, M., Wan, Z., Wang, H., Wen, M., Wu, R., Wen, Y., Yang, Y., Yu, Y., Wang, J., and Zhang, W. Malib: A parallel framework for population-based multi-agent reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(150):1–12, 2023. 13 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

A. Details of FightLadder 

A.1. Dense Reward 

The shaped dense reward for the i-th agent at step t is defined as follows: 

ri,t = α [λ(HP −i,t −1 − HP −i,t ) − (HP i,t −1 − HP i,t ) + ri, bonus ] , (1) where α is a scaling factor, HP i,t denotes agent i’s hit-point at step t and λ control the aggressiveness of learned agents, and 

−i denotes the opponent agent. At the end of the game, the agent i will receive a bonus reward ri, bonus , which is positively correlated to HP i if it wins and negatively correlated to HP −i if it loses. By default, we choose λ = 3 in SF2, FF2, and MK, and λ = 1 in SF3 and KOF97, for the consideration of practical performances. 

A.2. Game Settings 

Table 4 illustrates the observation, action, and rewards as well as other elements in the environment for all supported games — Street Fighter II (SF2), Fatal Fury 2 (FF2), Mortal Kombat (MK), Street Fighter III (SF3), and The King of Fighters ’97 (KOF97). 

Table 4. Specification of supported games in FightLadder.                                          

> SF2 FF2 MK SF3 KOF97
> Observation (Pixels) 100 ×128 ×3112 ×128 ×3112 ×160 ×3112 ×192 ×3112 ×192 ×3Human Action Supported Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Transformed Action Supported Yes Yes Yes No No Shaped Dense Reward Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Default Frames Per Step 88833Default Frames Stacked 312 12 12 99Additional Available Info HPs, Countdown, HPs, Countdown HPs, Countdown, HPs HPs, Countdown, Scoreboard, Positions Scoreboard Positions, Power Status

A.3. Comparison of MARL Game Platforms 

Table 5 compares our FightLadder with several popular MARL game platforms mostly focusing on competitive settings, in terms of observation space, action space, whether baseline methods are included and the number of agents in games. For the observation space, ‘Continuous’ indicates a vector-form latent state information of the game with continuous numerical values, and ‘Image’ indicates visual RGB information as observations. PommerMan (Resnick et al., 2018) uses grid environments therefore its observation only has discrete values. For the action space, most of the games only involves discrete action values except for Arena (Song et al., 2020). For the number of agents in these platforms, MPE provide diverse competitive settings like 1v1, 1v N , 1v1v1 and so on. MAgent includes 1 million agents competing againts each other, and for Neural MMO (Suarez et al., 2021) the number of agents is 256 or 1024. The team mode in our FightLadder and Arena supports the competitive settings of two teams, where each team includes multiple characters to be controlled by one team policy or separate agent policies. 

Table 5. Comparison of popular MARL game platforms. 

Env Observation Space Action Space Baselines # Agents 

MPE (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018) Continuous Discrete Yes 1v1, 1v N and 1v1v1... MAgent (Zheng et al., 2018) Continuous+Image Discrete Yes 1 million Arena (Song et al., 2020) Continuous+Image Continuous/Discrete Yes 1v1, N vN and team mode Neural MMO (Suarez et al., 2021) Continuous Discrete Yes 256 and 1024 PettingZoo Atari (Terry et al., 2021) Continuous+Image Discrete No 1v1 PommerMan (Resnick et al., 2018) Discrete Discrete No 2v2 FightLadder (Ours) Continuous+Image Discrete Yes 1v1 and team mode 

> 3

We uniformly sample the stacked frames as observations to improve the computational efficiency. 

14 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

B. Baseline Algorithms of FightLadder-Baselines 

Independent Learning (IPPO). Independent learning is a straightforward extension of single-agent RL into MARL. It decomposes the joint optimization into individual ones for each agent while regarding all other agents as part of the environment. It can be implemented easily by simultaneously running single-agent RL algorithms for each player. Theoretically, this independent learning paradigm suffers from suboptimality (Tan, 1993; Foerster et al., 2018), because the environment becomes non-stationary while other agents are updating their policies. However, recent work (de Witt et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022) finds that with modest hyperparameter tuning, IPPO can serve as a strong baseline compared to other state-of-the-art algorithms in some cooperative MARL tasks. 

Two-timescale Learning (2Timescale). Two-timescale learning follows the independent learning paradigm, but requires two players to update gradients according to the two-timescale rule, i.e., one player uses a much smaller step size than the other one. As a result of this modification, two-timescale learning enjoys some nice theoretical properties — it is proven that under some mild assumptions, independent policy gradient algorithms satisfying two-timescale converge to a Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum stochastic games (Daskalakis et al., 2020). 

Population-Based Methods. The independent learning framework is only training agents against the current version of their opponents, which may fail or converge slowly due to the lack of diversity (Dresher et al., 2016). Population-based methods are proposed to increase policy diversity by maintaining a pool of policies in previous iterations, and using them as a curriculum to update the current policy. More specifically, for t-th update, the agent μt plays with previous versions of its opponent ˜ν sampled from the meta-strategy ρν , which is a distribution over ν0, ν 1, . . . , ν t−1. Algorithm 1 presents the pseudo-code for general population-based methods. With different choices of sampling distribution, we can recover several state-of-the-art baselines: • Fictitious Self-Play (FSP), where ρν is the uniform distribution Uniform (ν0, ν 1, . . . , ν t−1) (Heinrich et al., 2015). • Policy-Space Response Oracles (PSRO), where (˜ μ, ˜ν) are sampled from the meta-strategy (ρμ, ρ ν ) by solving Nash equilibrium of the payoff matrix game between μ0, μ 1, . . . , μ t−1 and ν0, ν 1, . . . , ν t−1 (Lanctot et al., 2017). • League Training (League), where three types of agents — main agents, league exploiters, and main exploiters, are introduced into the population. Main agents train against themselves as well as all previous versions of agents in the population; league exploiters train against all previous agents; and main exploiters optimize the best response of main agents. Each type of agent adopts a different sampling distribution which is a mixture of self-play and prioritized fictitious self-play. We refer readers to (Vinyals et al., 2019) for more implementation details. 

Algorithm 1 Population-Based Methods for MGs  

> 1:

Initialize policies μ0 = {μh}, ν 0 = {νh}, h ∈ [H] 

> 2:

Initialize policy sets: μ = {μ0}, ν = {ν0} 

> 3:

Initialize meta-strategies: ρμ = [1 .], ρ ν = [1 .] 

> 4:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 5:

if t%2 == 0 then  

> 6:

νt = BEST _R ESPONSE (ρμ, μ ) 

> 7:

ν = ν S{νt} 

> 8:

Update ρν according to specific algorithms  

> 9:

else  

> 10:

μt = BEST _R ESPONSE (ρν , ν ) 

> 11:

μ = μ S{μt} 

> 12:

Update ρμ according to specific algorithms  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Return μ, ρ μ, ν, ρ ν

15 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

C. Experiment Details 

C.1. Hyperparameters (Table 6 and 7) Hyperparameters Value 

feature extractor CNN (Mnih et al., 2015) rollout steps for each environment 512 batch size 1024 epochs per update 4

γ 0.94 GAE λ 0.95 learning rate linear schedule from 2.5e-4 to 2.5e-6 clipping range linear schedule from 0.15 to 0.025 advantage normalization True entropy coefficient 0.0 gradient clipping 0.5 value function coefficient 0.5  

> Table 6. Training hyperparameters for PPO, which is the backbone for both single-player and two-player algorithms in the experiment.

FSP PSRO League 

# envs per learner 24 # envs per learner 24 # envs per learner 24 steps for BR 10M steps for BR 10M steps for BR 10M total steps 50M total steps 250M total steps 700M # main agent 1 # main agent 1 # main agent 1Nash solver ECOS # main exploiter 1(Domahidi et al., 2013) # league exploiter 2 

> Table 7. Training hyperparameters for FSP, PSRO, and League. We omit the details of League’s opponent scheduling here as it strictly follows the pseudocode provided in (Vinyals et al., 2019).

C.2. Training Details 

Figure 7, 8, and 9 report the payoff matrix of policies within the population for FSP, PSRO, and League, respectively, with the value representing the win rate of the left player against the right player. We trained all our agents on one server with 192 CPUs and 8 A6000 GPUs. 

D. Individual Elo Results 

D.1. IPPO (Figure 10) D.2. 2Timescale (Figure 11) D.3. FSP (Figure 12) D.4. PSRO (Figure 13) D.5. League (Figure 14) 

E. Visualization of Human Exploiters 

Figure 15 visualizes how human players can exploit learned models with a simple strategy. Full videos are provided in the supplementary material. 16 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning FSP0_right_h_0M 

> FSP0_right

FSP0_left 

FSP0_left_h_0M 

0.62 

0.52 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 FSP0_right_h_10M 

> FSP0_right_h_0M
> FSP0_right

FSP0_left 

FSP0_left_h_0M 

FSP0_left_h_10M 

0.91 0.99 

0.00 

0.11 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 FSP0_right_h_20M 

> FSP0_right_h_10M
> FSP0_right_h_0M
> FSP0_right

FSP0_left 

FSP0_left_h_0M 

FSP0_left_h_10M 

FSP0_left_h_20M 

FSP0_left_h_30M 

0.99 0.99 0.99 

0.00 

0.05 

0.08 

0.48 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 FSP0_right_h_40M 

> FSP0_right_h_30M
> FSP0_right_h_20M
> FSP0_right_h_10M
> FSP0_right_h_0M
> FSP0_right

FSP0_left 

FSP0_left_h_0M 

FSP0_left_h_10M 

FSP0_left_h_20M 

FSP0_left_h_30M 

FSP0_left_h_40M 

FSP0_left_h_50M 

0.76 0.84 0.95 0.99 1.00 

0.00 

0.03 

0.07 

0.06 

0.22 

0.40 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 FSP0_right_h_60M 

> FSP0_right_h_50M
> FSP0_right_h_40M
> FSP0_right_h_30M
> FSP0_right_h_20M
> FSP0_right_h_10M
> FSP0_right_h_0M
> FSP0_right

FSP0_left 

FSP0_left_h_0M 

FSP0_left_h_10M 

FSP0_left_h_20M 

FSP0_left_h_30M 

FSP0_left_h_40M 

FSP0_left_h_50M 

FSP0_left_h_60M 

0.64 0.88 0.94 0.96 0.96 0.97 1.00 

0.01 

0.02 

0.04 

0.06 

0.16 

0.21 

0.04 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 FSP0_right_h_70M 

> FSP0_right_h_60M
> FSP0_right_h_50M
> FSP0_right_h_40M
> FSP0_right_h_30M
> FSP0_right_h_20M
> FSP0_right_h_10M
> FSP0_right_h_0M
> FSP0_right

FSP0_left 

FSP0_left_h_0M 

FSP0_left_h_10M 

FSP0_left_h_20M 

FSP0_left_h_30M 

FSP0_left_h_40M 

FSP0_left_h_50M 

FSP0_left_h_60M 

FSP0_left_h_70M 

FSP0_left_h_80M 

0.96 0.97 0.94 0.97 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 

0.00 

0.02 

0.03 

0.02 

0.11 

0.19 

0.09 

0.04 

0.50 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Figure 7. FSP details (training order from top left to bottom right): For FSP, there is one agent for each side (left or right). The name of each row indicates the agent information as Character_Side_Checkpoint . Checkpoint=h_xM represents a previous version of agent saved at x million steps. The value indicates the win rate of the left (row) player against the right (column) player. 

17 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning PSRO0_right_h_0M 

> PSRO0_right

PSRO0_left 

PSRO0_left_h_0M 

0.63 

0.65 0.47 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 PSRO0_right_h_10M 

> PSRO0_right_h_0M
> PSRO0_right

PSRO0_left 

PSRO0_left_h_0M 

PSRO0_left_h_10M 

1.00 0.96 

0.02 0.65 0.02 

0.31 0.98 0.03 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 PSRO0_right_h_30M 

> PSRO0_right_h_20M
> PSRO0_right_h_10M
> PSRO0_right_h_0M
> PSRO0_right

PSRO0_left 

PSRO0_left_h_0M 

PSRO0_left_h_10M 

PSRO0_left_h_20M 

PSRO0_left_h_30M 

0.93 0.98 1.00 0.96 

0.02 0.07 0.02 0.65 0.04 

0.03 0.02 0.31 0.98 0.04 

0.01 0.63 0.99 0.93 0.01 

0.07 0.93 1.00 0.96 0.00 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 PSRO0_right_h_50M 

> PSRO0_right_h_40M
> PSRO0_right_h_30M
> PSRO0_right_h_20M
> PSRO0_right_h_10M
> PSRO0_right_h_0M
> PSRO0_right

PSRO0_left 

PSRO0_left_h_0M 

PSRO0_left_h_10M 

PSRO0_left_h_20M 

PSRO0_left_h_30M 

PSRO0_left_h_40M 

PSRO0_left_h_50M 

0.95 0.92 0.89 0.99 1.00 0.96 

0.02 0.01 0.02 0.07 0.02 0.65 0.04 

0.06 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.31 0.98 0.04 

0.08 0.00 0.01 0.63 0.99 0.93 0.01 

0.04 0.01 0.07 0.93 1.00 0.96 0.00 

0.16 0.39 0.87 0.94 0.94 0.99 0.07 

0.08 0.97 0.90 0.82 0.91 0.98 0.06 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 PSRO0_right_h_60M 

> PSRO0_right_h_50M
> PSRO0_right_h_40M
> PSRO0_right_h_30M
> PSRO0_right_h_20M
> PSRO0_right_h_10M
> PSRO0_right_h_0M
> PSRO0_right

PSRO0_left 

PSRO0_left_h_0M 

PSRO0_left_h_10M 

PSRO0_left_h_20M 

PSRO0_left_h_30M 

PSRO0_left_h_40M 

PSRO0_left_h_50M 

PSRO0_left_h_60M 

PSRO0_left_h_70M 

0.95 0.98 0.92 0.88 1.00 1.00 0.96 

0.09 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.07 0.02 0.65 0.04 

0.35 0.06 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.31 0.98 0.00 

0.22 0.08 0.00 0.01 0.63 0.99 0.93 0.01 

0.18 0.04 0.01 0.07 0.93 1.00 0.96 0.00 

0.02 0.16 0.39 0.87 0.94 0.94 0.99 0.01 

0.23 0.08 0.97 0.90 0.82 0.91 0.98 0.07 

0.12 1.00 0.91 0.65 0.53 0.79 0.94 0.10 

0.96 0.99 0.92 0.86 1.00 0.98 0.98 0.17 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 PSRO0_right_h_80M 

> PSRO0_right_h_70M
> PSRO0_right_h_60M
> PSRO0_right_h_50M
> PSRO0_right_h_40M
> PSRO0_right_h_30M
> PSRO0_right_h_20M
> PSRO0_right_h_10M
> PSRO0_right_h_0M
> PSRO0_right

PSRO0_left 

PSRO0_left_h_0M 

PSRO0_left_h_10M 

PSRO0_left_h_20M 

PSRO0_left_h_30M 

PSRO0_left_h_40M 

PSRO0_left_h_50M 

PSRO0_left_h_60M 

PSRO0_left_h_70M 

PSRO0_left_h_80M 

0.92 0.91 0.97 0.98 0.92 0.94 1.00 1.00 0.96 

0.00 0.00 0.09 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.07 0.02 0.65 0.04 

0.02 0.00 0.35 0.06 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.31 0.98 0.00 

0.04 0.06 0.22 0.08 0.00 0.01 0.63 0.99 0.93 0.01 

0.05 0.05 0.18 0.04 0.01 0.07 0.93 1.00 0.96 0.00 

0.04 0.04 0.02 0.16 0.39 0.87 0.94 0.94 0.99 0.01 

0.02 0.06 0.23 0.08 0.97 0.90 0.82 0.91 0.98 0.03 

0.03 0.09 0.12 1.00 0.91 0.65 0.53 0.79 0.94 0.01 

0.19 0.08 0.96 0.99 0.92 0.86 1.00 0.98 0.98 0.18 

0.23 0.93 0.84 0.91 0.93 0.87 0.98 0.99 1.00 0.04 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Figure 8. PSRO details (training order from top left to bottom right): For PSRO, there is one agent for each side (left or right). The name of each row indicates the agent information as Character_Side_Checkpoint . Checkpoint=h_xM represents a previous version of agent saved at x million steps. The value indicates the win rate of the left (row) player against the right (column) player. 

18 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning ME0_right 

> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right
> LE0_right

LE0_left 

LE1_left 

MA0_left 

MA0_left_h_0M 

ME0_left 

0.61 

0.54 

0.58 0.56 0.57 

0.48 0.52 0.53 

0.48 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 ME0_right_h_10M 

> ME0_right
> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right
> LE0_right

LE0_left 

LE0_left_h_10M 

LE1_left 

LE1_left_h_10M 

MA0_left 

MA0_left_h_0M 

MA0_left_h_10M 

ME0_left 

ME0_left_h_10M 

0.53 0.93 

0.15 0.19 0.40 

0.25 0.73 

0.16 0.27 0.30 

0.85 0.91 0.97 0.80 

0.08 0.03 0.00 0.02 

0.61 0.34 0.50 0.58 

0.97 0.06 

0.44 0.71 0.70 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 ME0_right_h_10M 

> ME0_right
> MA0_right_h_20M
> MA0_right_h_10M
> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right_h_10M
> LE1_right
> LE0_right_h_10M
> LE0_right

LE0_left 

LE0_left_h_10M 

LE0_left_h_20M 

LE1_left 

LE1_left_h_10M 

LE1_left_h_20M 

MA0_left 

MA0_left_h_0M 

MA0_left_h_10M 

MA0_left_h_20M 

ME0_left 

ME0_left_h_10M 

0.94 0.66 0.87 0.97 0.93 0.97 

0.09 0.10 0.08 

0.29 0.08 0.21 

0.86 0.47 0.84 0.90 0.82 0.86 

0.21 0.03 0.04 

0.35 0.41 0.38 

0.93 0.91 0.77 0.95 0.95 0.45 0.88 0.90 

0.03 0.02 0.00 0.02 

0.14 0.25 0.22 0.17 

0.25 0.26 0.25 0.29 

0.43 0.98 1.00 0.06 

0.26 0.31 0.31 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 ME0_right_h_30M 

> ME0_right_h_10M
> ME0_right
> MA0_right_h_30M
> MA0_right_h_20M
> MA0_right_h_10M
> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right_h_20M
> LE1_right_h_10M
> LE1_right
> LE0_right_h_30M
> LE0_right_h_20M
> LE0_right_h_10M
> LE0_right

LE0_left 

LE0_left_h_10M 

LE0_left_h_20M 

LE0_left_h_30M 

LE1_left 

LE1_left_h_10M 

LE1_left_h_20M 

LE1_left_h_30M 

MA0_left 

MA0_left_h_0M 

MA0_left_h_10M 

MA0_left_h_20M 

MA0_left_h_30M 

ME0_left 

ME0_left_h_10M 

ME0_left_h_30M 

0.89 0.86 0.34 0.89 0.94 0.97 0.78 0.93 0.68 0.72 0.94 

0.09 0.06 0.01 

0.07 0.09 0.70 

0.06 0.22 0.79 

0.94 0.91 0.76 0.92 0.94 0.98 0.91 0.98 0.81 0.88 0.90 

0.10 0.02 0.72 

0.09 0.38 0.06 

0.28 0.54 0.83 

0.84 0.94 0.91 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.98 0.43 0.90 0.92 0.84 0.88 0.94 

0.16 0.02 0.05 0.02 

0.30 0.14 0.13 0.76 

0.28 0.11 0.12 0.76 

0.44 0.16 0.28 0.87 

0.31 0.67 0.28 0.82 0.06 

0.12 0.17 0.76 

0.06 0.05 0.70 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 ME0_right_h_30M 

> ME0_right_h_10M
> ME0_right
> MA0_right_h_40M
> MA0_right_h_30M
> MA0_right_h_20M
> MA0_right_h_10M
> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right_h_40M
> LE1_right_h_20M
> LE1_right_h_10M
> LE1_right
> LE0_right_h_30M
> LE0_right_h_20M
> LE0_right_h_10M
> LE0_right

LE0_left 

LE0_left_h_10M 

LE0_left_h_20M 

LE0_left_h_30M 

LE1_left 

LE1_left_h_10M 

LE1_left_h_20M 

LE1_left_h_30M 

LE1_left_h_40M 

MA0_left 

MA0_left_h_0M 

MA0_left_h_10M 

MA0_left_h_20M 

MA0_left_h_30M 

MA0_left_h_40M 

ME0_left 

ME0_left_h_10M 

ME0_left_h_30M 

0.96 0.91 0.61 0.56 0.78 0.91 0.99 0.66 0.87 0.93 0.84 0.87 0.98 

0.05 0.10 0.19 

0.06 0.05 0.15 

0.06 0.11 0.14 

0.94 0.96 0.50 0.91 0.96 0.94 0.99 0.61 0.95 0.92 0.92 0.90 0.92 

0.05 0.11 0.23 

0.09 0.27 0.24 

0.14 0.26 0.31 

0.17 0.31 0.37 

0.95 0.94 0.91 0.81 0.87 0.93 0.97 0.98 0.51 0.75 0.93 0.94 0.88 0.84 0.94 

0.13 0.02 0.03 0.14 

0.17 0.13 0.15 0.31 

0.12 0.09 0.15 0.25 

0.27 0.17 0.34 0.36 

0.32 0.29 0.63 0.43 

0.53 0.65 0.87 0.91 0.99 0.06 

0.10 0.26 0.34 

0.13 0.06 0.22 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 ME0_right_h_50M 

> ME0_right_h_30M
> ME0_right_h_10M
> ME0_right
> MA0_right_h_50M
> MA0_right_h_40M
> MA0_right_h_30M
> MA0_right_h_20M
> MA0_right_h_10M
> MA0_right_h_0M
> MA0_right
> LE1_right_h_40M
> LE1_right_h_20M
> LE1_right_h_10M
> LE1_right
> LE0_right_h_50M
> LE0_right_h_30M
> LE0_right_h_20M
> LE0_right_h_10M
> LE0_right

LE0_left 

LE0_left_h_10M 

LE0_left_h_20M 

LE0_left_h_30M 

LE0_left_h_50M 

LE1_left 

LE1_left_h_10M 

LE1_left_h_20M 

LE1_left_h_30M 

LE1_left_h_40M 

LE1_left_h_50M 

LE1_left_h_60M 

MA0_left 

MA0_left_h_0M 

MA0_left_h_10M 

MA0_left_h_20M 

MA0_left_h_30M 

MA0_left_h_40M 

MA0_left_h_50M 

MA0_left_h_60M 

ME0_left 

ME0_left_h_10M 

ME0_left_h_30M 

ME0_left_h_50M 

0.62 0.87 0.88 0.31 0.31 0.31 0.61 0.88 0.89 0.57 0.80 0.90 0.41 0.75 0.73 0.83 

0.05 0.09 0.36 

0.06 0.05 0.14 

0.09 0.05 0.14 

0.07 0.26 0.38 

0.92 0.96 0.92 0.63 0.83 0.90 0.94 0.97 1.00 0.85 0.99 0.95 0.86 0.92 0.97 0.95 

0.04 0.11 0.29 

0.08 0.14 0.44 

0.11 0.12 0.40 

0.10 0.17 0.59 

0.11 0.31 0.61 

0.26 0.36 0.83 

0.93 0.95 0.94 0.91 0.79 0.87 0.86 0.94 0.95 0.97 0.48 0.92 0.97 0.97 0.91 0.96 0.96 0.98 

0.11 0.01 0.03 0.20 

0.44 0.11 0.11 0.44 

0.22 0.05 0.15 0.40 

0.29 0.07 0.28 0.55 

0.37 0.29 0.38 0.66 

0.52 0.19 0.55 0.74 

0.75 0.40 0.69 0.85 

0.64 0.69 0.63 0.81 0.77 0.95 0.06 

0.11 0.11 0.52 

0.07 0.04 0.18 

0.11 0.23 0.55 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Figure 9. League training details (training order from top left to bottom right): For league training, there is one main agent (MA), two league exploiters (LE0, LE1), and one main exploiter (ME) for each side (left or right). The name of each row indicates the agent information as Character_Side_Checkpoint . Checkpoint=h_xM represents a previous version of agent saved at x million steps. The value indicates the win rate of the left (row) player against the right (column) player. 

19 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

IPPO: Left      

> 5 M
> 23 M
> 41 M
> 11 M
> 29 M
> 47 M
> 17 M
> 35 M
> 5 M
> 23 M
> 41 M
> 11 M
> 29 M
> 47 M
> 17 M
> 35 M
> 012345

Steps 1e7 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

IPPO: Left       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> Count

IPPO: Left       

> Seed 1
> Seed 2
> Seed 3
> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

IPPO: Right      

> 5 M
> 23 M
> 41 M
> 11 M
> 29 M
> 47 M
> 17 M
> 35 M
> 5 M
> 23 M
> 41 M
> 11 M
> 29 M
> 47 M
> 17 M
> 35 M
> 012345

Steps 1e7 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

IPPO: Right       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> Count

IPPO: Right 

> Seed 1
> Seed 2
> Seed 3

Figure 10. The Elo rating for the population of agents trained with IPPO algorithm. The upper three plots are for left-side player and the bottom three are for the right-side player. The Elo rating is plotted against the winning rate over matched policies (left figures), training steps (middle figures) and the number of policies (right figures). 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

2Timescale: Left      

> 5 M
> 29 M
> 53 M
> 13 M
> 37 M
> 61 M
> 21 M
> 45 M
> 5 M
> 29 M
> 53 M
> 13 M
> 37 M
> 61 M
> 21 M
> 45 M
> 012345

Steps 1e7 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

2Timescale: Left       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Count

2Timescale: Left       

> Seed 1
> Seed 2
> Seed 3
> 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

2Timescale: Right      

> 5 M
> 29 M
> 53 M
> 13 M
> 37 M
> 61 M
> 21 M
> 45 M
> 5 M
> 29 M
> 53 M
> 13 M
> 37 M
> 61 M
> 21 M
> 45 M
> 012345

Steps 1e7 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

2Timescale: Right       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Count

2Timescale: Right 

> Seed 1
> Seed 2
> Seed 3

Figure 11. The Elo rating for the population of agents trained with 2Timescale algorithm. The upper three plots are for left-side player and the bottom three are for the right-side player. The Elo rating is plotted against the winning rate over matched policies (left figures), training steps (middle figures) and the number of policies (right figures). 

20 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

FSP: Left      

> 5 M
> 104 M
> 203 M
> 38 M
> 137 M
> 236 M
> 71 M
> 170 M
> 5 M
> 104 M
> 203 M
> 38 M
> 137 M
> 236 M
> 71 M
> 170 M
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

Steps 1e8 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

FSP: Left       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Count

FSP: Left      

> FSP
> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

FSP: Right      

> 5 M
> 104 M
> 203 M
> 38 M
> 137 M
> 236 M
> 71 M
> 170 M
> 5 M
> 104 M
> 203 M
> 38 M
> 137 M
> 236 M
> 71 M
> 170 M
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

Steps 1e8 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

FSP: Right       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Count

FSP: Right 

> FSP

Figure 12. The Elo rating for the population of agents trained with FSP algorithm. The upper three plots are for left-side player and the bottom three are for the right-side player. The Elo rating is plotted against the winning rate over matched policies (left figures), training steps (middle figures) and the number of policies (right figures). 400 600 800 1000 1200 

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

PSRO: Left     

> 5 M
> 98 M
> 191 M
> 36 M
> 129 M
> 222 M
> 67 M
> 160 M
> 5 M
> 98 M
> 191 M
> 36 M
> 129 M
> 222 M
> 67 M
> 160 M
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Steps 1e8 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

PSRO: Left       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Count

PSRO: Left      

> PSRO
> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

PSRO: Right      

> 5 M
> 98 M
> 191 M
> 36 M
> 129 M
> 222 M
> 67 M
> 160 M
> 5 M
> 98 M
> 191 M
> 36 M
> 129 M
> 222 M
> 67 M
> 160 M
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

Steps 1e8 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

PSRO: Right       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> Count

PSRO: Right 

> PSRO

Figure 13. The Elo rating for the population of agents trained with PSRO algorithm. The upper three plots are for left-side player and the bottom three are for the right-side player. The Elo rating is plotted against the winning rate over matched policies (left figures), training steps (middle figures) and the number of policies (right figures). 

21 FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 600 800 1000 1200 1400 

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

League: Left        

> 5 M
> 227 M
> 449 M
> 116 M
> 338 M
> 560 M
> 5 M
> 227 M
> 449 M
> 116 M
> 338 M
> 560 M
> 01234567

Steps 1e8 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

League: Left       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Count

League: Left    

> MA0
> ME0
> LE0
> LE1
> 600 800 1000 1200

Elo 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Win Rate

League: Right        

> 5 M
> 227 M
> 449 M
> 116 M
> 338 M
> 560 M
> 5 M
> 227 M
> 449 M
> 116 M
> 338 M
> 560 M
> 01234567

Steps 1e8 

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> Elo

League: Right       

> 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

Elo 

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> Count

League: Right 

> MA0
> ME0
> LE0
> LE1

Figure 14. The Elo rating for the population of agents trained with League training. The upper three plots are for left-side player and the bottom three are for the right-side player. The Elo rating is plotted against the winning rate over matched policies (left figures), training steps (middle figures) and the number of policies (right figures). 

Figure 15. Demonstration of the exploiting strategy of one human player. The human player (Ryu on the right in white) defends when the AI opponent (Ryu on the left in gray) attacks, and inflicts damage with low kicks. 

22